@c
@c philosophy-evaluation.texi -- Package evaluation text;
@c
@c Copyright (C) 2014, 2015 Bruno Félix Rezende Ribeiro
@c <oitofelix@gnu.org>
@c
@c Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
@c document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
@c Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
@c Foundation; with no Invariant Sections.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU Free Documentation
@c License along with this program.  If not, see
@c <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
@c

@c %**start of header
@ifclear manual
@setfilename philosophy-evaluation
@documentencoding UTF-8
@c @documentlanguage en_US
@firstparagraphindent insert
@c @footnotestyle end
@settitle GNU philosophy
@end ifclear
@c @include release.texi
@c %**end of header





GNU philosophy is the GNU Project's exhaustive collection of articles
and essays about free software and related matters.  It provides all
of them @emph{standalone} or @emph{collected} as a huge single book,
in @emph{Info}, @emph{HTML}, @emph{PDF}, @emph{plain text}, and every
other format supported by Texinfo, in several different languages.  It
makes the individual Texinfo source code of any essay readily
available for inclusion in another package's documentation and also
implements a way to generate the whole
@url{https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/, GNU website philosophy section}
automatically from the Texinfo sources.  Last, but not least, it
facilitates the future work of the @acronym{FSF, Free Software
Foundation} in the publication of free software articles collection
books, like: ``Free Software, Free Society: Selected Essays of Richard
M. Stallman''.

Some highlighted benefits are:
@itemize
@item
It is more easy to spread GNU philosophy.  The availability of several
formats means that it is simpler for people to find the desired
article in a file format that fits their constraints and suits the
access, redistribution and presentation requirements.
@item
Besides its free software components, the GNU system ought to document
its own philosophy.  It is very natural for users to expect that the
philosophy and history that inspired the GNU system existence be
easily accessible within its documentation system.
@item
It makes life easier for authors who want to use their package
documentation to spread the GNU philosophy.  Before it there was no
easy way to get GNU philosophical articles in an adequate format to
include in arbitrary documentation; many articles only existed in HTML
specifically tailored for GNU website, others only in plain text
format hidden deeply inside package distributions, and a bunch in
non-portable Texinfo extensively written for exclusive TeX processing.
@item
All essays and articles are written in the GNU Project's standard,
official and hub documentation language: Texinfo.  Making the GNU
philosophical documents comply with GNU standards assists in
uniformity and coherence.  For instance, until this package conception
it was remarkable the almost complete lack of essays in Info, the GNU
Project's official online documentation format.
@item
There is a single place of maintenance for GNU Project's philosophical
articles and essays.  The upkeep of all GNU Project's philosophy
documents is optimized since no error must be corrected twice and
every addition is atomically, and instantaneously, available in every
supported format, for every intended purpose.
@end itemize

The maintainers set a clear commitment to not blindly take for granted
the quality of automatic generated output, and therefore they adapt
the Texinfo source code for the particularities of each available
output format, in order to make it look better, but without the
unmindful and excessive use of back-end specific code.





@heading Build

Below are links for collection and standalone builds of
GNU@tie{}philosophy.  As they say, one image is worth a thousand
words, you can get an idea of what GNU philosophy looks like from the
users' standpoint:

@set remote http://oitofelix.github.io/gnu-philosophy

@table @asis
@item Collection
@itemize
@item @url{@value{remote}/collection/pdf/philosophy.pdf, PDF}
@item @url{@value{remote}/collection/html/philosophy.html, HTML}
@item @url{@value{remote}/collection/info.tar.gz, Info}
@item @url{@value{remote}/collection/txt/philosophy.txt, Plain text}
@end itemize
@item Standalone
@itemize
@item @url{@value{remote}/standalone/pdf/, PDF}
@item @url{@value{remote}/standalone/html/, HTML}
@item @url{@value{remote}/standalone/info.tar.gz, Info}
@item @url{@value{remote}/standalone/txt/, Plain text}
@end itemize
@end table

There are four additionally supported formats: @emph{DVI},
@emph{PostScript}, @emph{Dockbook} and @emph{Texinfo XML}.





@heading Source code

Finally, you can get the GNU philosophy 0.1.20140214 source code, a
pre-release and demonstration version, specifically made for this
evaluation process.

@url{http://oitofelix.github.io/gnu-philosophy/philosophy-0.1.20140214.tar.gz}

Its VCS repository is located at
@url{https://github.com/oitofelix/gnu-philosophy}.





@heading Dependencies

Obviously, this package depends only on free software and has
dependencies only at build time.  They are:

@itemize
@item GNU Autoconf >= 2.60
@item GNU Automake >= 1.13
@item GNU Make >= 3.81
@item GNU Texinfo >= 5.0
@item GNU Unifont
@item ImageMagick
@item PO4A (SVN) > 0.45.
This version isn't released yet, but the necessary patch has been
submitted by me and applied to PO4A development version.
@end itemize





@heading Configuration, building and installation

This package uses GNU Autotools but it relies heavily on GNU Make
advanced features.  The inherently different nature of this package
makes it difficult to follow the GNU Coding Standards in respect to
make-files' standard goals, which have proved insufficient.  This
package uses a relatively well-suited and easy to use mechanism which
is fully described in its documentation.  To alleviate the burden on
people not familiar with its make-file interface, it has a build
system help mechanism which assists users on build, installation and
some other tasks related to build management.  After configuration
type `make help' to learn how to use it.

However, I've been experimenting with diverse build system setups and
I'm still very receptive to suggestions, as ever, from my GNU fellows.





@heading Licensing

The licensing terms are not defined yet, as I recognize the GNU
Project must have the final say on that issue.  I would bet the
appropriate license would be GNU FDL 1.3+, with each essay being an
invariant section, with the Front-Cover text being "A GNU Manual," and
with the Back-Cover texts saying:

"You have the freedom to copy and modify this GNU manual.  Buying
copies from the FSF supports it in developing GNU and promoting
software freedom."

The modifiable parts would be the @emph{Overview}, which currently
comprehends:

Description, Prerequisites, Configuration, Make interface, Goal
suffixes, Build, Installation, Cleaning, Making a tarball, Usage,
Distribution, Getting a copy, Contact, Bug reporting, Contributing,
Donating, Hacking;

and @emph{release documentation}, which comprehends:

News, To do, Bugs, Authors, Maintainers, Thanks, Donors;

both of which presently comprises 20 pages out of 253.





@heading Proof of concept in documentation maintainability

The GNU philosophy and GNU ccd2cue packages are proofs of an
interesting concept about a documentation maintainability technique
I've been developing.  The core idea behind it is that all
documentation-like object related to the package should be built from
the same set of Texinfo sources, resulting in a single point of
maintenance for an integrated documentation.  For instance, there are
four different class of package documentation:

@table @asis
@item Top-level
Comprised of the top-level files @file{NEWS}, @file{TODO},
@file{BUGS}, @file{AUTHORS}, @file{MAINTAINERS}, @file{THANKS} and
@file{DONORS}.  They are generated at distribution time.
@item Manual
The actual Info, PDF, DVI, PS and plain text manual documentation.
They are generated at distribution or build time, depending upon the
output format and maintainers discretion.
@item Home page
The package's homepage found at
@url{http://www.gnu.org/software/@var{package}}.  It's generated
usually by the package maintainers with @samp{make homepage}, at each
new release, and then committed to gnu.org server.
@item Build system
The build-time help system, which an user can access by @samp{make
help-@var{topic}} --- where @var{topic} is the topic at hand.  They
are generated on demand.
@end table

As the maintainers always need to update the top-level documentation
files for each new release, the package's manual and homepage gets
automatically updated as a side-effect.  All sections which makes
sense in more than one place, for example the package description
which makes sense in the top-level file @file{README}, in the manual
and homepage, are shared.  One can define arbitrary rules for section
sharing, and conditional processing, among several different targets
to obtain complex results.  With this method, no homepage will ever
get outdated, because updating any part of the documentation, updates
all related targets.

An additional benefit is that it's easier to obtain an redundant
documentation, where the same information can be put in diverse
different places without additional effort.  For example, the contents
of the file @file{AUTHORS} is meaningful, convenient and useful not
only in the top-level documentation, where it traditionally belongs
to, but also in the package's manual and homepage.  If a user do not
have the package's tarball the user yet can easily retrieve the
package's authors list from the website or manual.

As the package's homepage is automatically generated from the
documentation sources, we have an additional benefit: the
standardization of GNU packages homepages.  There are several GNU
packages whose homepage is outdated, or is visually and functionally
dissonant, or is not meaningful or useful at all.  This method can
bring coherence, consistence and maintainability to GNU packages
homepages.  GNU ccd2cue is a prototype of package which has the
homepage automatically generated from a set of Texinfo sources for
integrated documentation.  Check out
@url{http://www.gnu.org/software/ccd2cue}.  If the maintainers still
want a fancy homepage, there is nothing stopping them from manually
maintaining one, and then putting a link to it on the top menu of the
automatically generated homepage.  That way every user visiting GNU
website will be presented with a standard and clean interface,
whatever the package, but at per discretion can resort to the stylish
one.

Analogously, we gain the standardization of top-level documentation,
@emph{overview} and @emph{release} information across GNU manuals, and
build-time help, where needed.

Once the Texinfo sources and the build system has been adapted to this
concept, the maintenance of documentation is much more easy and
effective, and the users benefit from consistency and clearness.

As an example of the prompt benefits of the documentation integration
concept: the GNU philosophy package home page is already done, because
its documentation is already done.  You can check it at
@url{http://oitofelix.github.io/gnu-philosophy/homepage/}.  Be
aware that the server side includes are all missing, so there is no
CSS being processed, and therefore the page looks raw.  However, the
homepage is complete, in the sense that that very homepage, if put
under gnu.org domain, would look pretty like the GNU ccd2cue one.

If the GNU project is interested in the application of this concept in
a large scale, by suggesting it in the @cite{GNU Coding Standards} or
in the @cite{Information for maintainers of GNU software}, I'll be
glad to write extensive documentation and even implement it in GNU
hello package, for reference.







@heading The Future

Below is a table reflecting our intentions about the future of GNU
philosophy package and gnu.org philosophy section infrastructure.  To
succeed on each one of these vast items it will be necessary hard work
and closely cooperation between GNU philosophy maintainers, gnu.org
webmasters and translators.  We should give extensive thought and
discussion about the technical details so we can achieve a smooth and
gradual migration from the current infrastructure to the new proposed
one.


@table @emph

@item Integration of essays
The GNU philosophy package ought to be the comprehensive collection of
GNU Project's philosophical essays.  Therefore, at each new release we
add several articles until we assimilate the entire gnu.org philosophy
section.

@item Integration of translations
The GNU philosophy package is also primarily concerned about the
localization of GNU essays, so each available translation of a
gnu.org philosophy section essay have to be integrated.  After
the integration of all existing translations, we'll continue to
integrate new ones as soon as they become available.  The idealistic
final objective is to have every article and essay fully translated to
every relevant human language.

Like gnu.org web-pages GNU philosophy uses Debian PO4A for i18n.  That
means, all procedures and experience the GNU Project has with it can
be more or less directly translated to GNU philosophy package.  Maybe
it can be practical to develop some scripts to convert HTML PO files
to an initial Texinfo PO in order to aid translation.

@item Automatic generation of gnu.org philosophy section
The gnu.org philosophy section should be a by-product of a particular
automated build performed on this package on a regular basis, in such
a way that GNU philosophy becomes the central point of maintenance of
GNU philosophical essays, so every change is committed only once to it
and there will be no need to do manual synchronization.

@item Establishment of a new work-flow
A new work-flow should be established since the writers of free
software philosophy articles, in particular those of the GNU Project,
should perhaps work closely with GNU philosophy maintainers rather
than webmasters when submitting new essays.

@item Integration of foreign essays
Maybe there are some GNU packages that are distributed with free
software essays that are not included in the GNU Project's web page.
If there are, we need to include them in GNU philosophy too.  There
are other essays that are published elsewhere that maybe would fit and
complement GNU philosophy, and hence should be included too.

@item Creation of functional indexes
For the sake of general public's understanding and the benefit of free
software community, once all essays have been collected into GNU
philosophy package, we can start a throughout meta-study about the
essays and how their understanding can help the GNU community to stand
by software freedom and against digital threats (like DRM, SaaSS or
surveillance).

For example, we can create a document based on citation and indexation
of several essays and articles under a similar subject.  For instance,
we can have a document entitled ``Inspiring Quotes of Richard
M. Stallman'' briefly citing and linking to the correspondent
citations and articles.  Another example would be a document entitled
``Refutation of Common Arguments in Favor of Proprietary Software''
indexed by those arguments and then citing and linking to the
correspondents set-offs.

@item A ncurses/X11 configuration system
A semi-graphical terminal-based and graphical window-based
configuration system, like the one present in the GNU Linux-Libre
build system, would allow for a more fine-grained and easy
configuration, increasing the effective utility of the build system
and encouraging people to build the package by themselves in
configurations that perfectly suit their needs.

For instance, there could be means to select exactly what articles and
essays the build system should include in the compiled collections,
allowing the user to build a book tailored for a specific task at
hand.

@end table





@heading Manifesto

My name is Bruno Félix Rezende Ribeiro @email{oitofelix@@gnu.org}.
I'm the author and maintainer of @emph{GNU ccd2cue}.

The GNU Project's most remarkable contribution to humanity is
something which fascinates me: its philosophy.  Right from the
beginning of my contact with GNU ideas it became clear the paramount
importance of making people aware of GNU existence and significance.

By that reason, while developing GNU ccd2cue's documentation, I've
kept in mind the ideal design of a GNU manual, whose purpose is not
simply defined by its technical qualities of good tutorial and
reference material, but beyond that, ought to constitute a crucial way
of spreading the GNU Project's word about freedom to the world.

To make a GNU manual an instrument for the profession of GNU Project's
idealism one doesn't need to look too far.  The GNU Project has a
singular collection of first hand, high quality, topic-broad
philosophical articles and essays about free software at its
website@footnote{@url{https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/}}.

However, there is a problem a GNU maintainer, or any free software
developer, has to face when working in the inclusion of any set of
such philosophical essays into per software documentation: the GNU
Project does not systematically maintain its philosophical essays in a
format appropriate for inclusion in Texinfo documentation.  In fact,
it seems the main way GNU Project distributes its essays is through
its web pages, therefore almost only in HTML format, specially made
for gnu.org domain.

That was the problem I faced when working on GNU ccd2cue
documentation.  I tried to convert some essays from HTML to Texinfo,
but not only the conversion was poor but extensive manual modification
has proved necessary.  It didn't take long to realize there is no
sense in making isolated conversions here and there to solve only my
own problem as others may have the same need.  Why let the GNU
Project, and the free software developers community in general,
duplicate efforts every time one wants to include some of GNU
philosophy essays in per software documentation?

Shortly this question took a more general form beyond the development
niche: what if users, supporters of GNU and free software, want to
share GNU articles and essays with each other?  Are the current
gnu.org web-pages enough?  Are the web-pages the best conceivable way
to present the GNU philosophy to the world?  Can't the diffusion of
GNU essays be improved?

The GNU Project has a well known and fair reputation of writing high
quality free software manuals.  Wouldn't it be very good for public
perception and opinion about GNU, if there were a respectable, high
quality, well-presented GNU manual which documents GNU's own
philosophy?

Soon I became convinced that something had to be done about it.  Then
I started working on a package which later I would offer to GNU, under
my maintenance, for the benefit of the whole free software community.
I gave that package the most natural name one could possibly expect:
``philosophy'', so when it becomes a GNU package it would be dubbed
``GNU@tie{}philosophy'', a term which then would have two distinct but
coincidental meanings.@footnote{@emph{GNU philosophy} is the
philosophy of GNU and also a GNU package named ``philosophy'' which
documents it.}

To speed up the development I looked around for whatever essays I
could find which were in formats more easily manageable for
integration into the package.  Eventually I came across the Texinfo
source code for the book ``Free Software, Free Society: Selected
Essays of Richard M. Stallman''
@footnote{@url{http://bzr.savannah.gnu.org/lh/books/files/head:/free-software-free-society/}},
which had not only a set of remarkable essays but the classical and
primordial ones which were a must-have and very good start point.
However, the Texinfo source code was so fine-tuned for @TeX{} output
and for the specifics of use in that particular book that I've had to
make several changes.@footnote{Although the book is the start point of
GNU philosophy package, I wasn't able to properly build from the
pristine sources of the book.}

After three months of work, I'm pleased to announce to
GNU@tie{}Project the first, pre-release and evaluation version, of
GNU@tie{}philosophy, currently comprised of exactly the sames essays
of ``Free Software, Free Society: Selected Essays of Richard
M. Stallman, Second Edition''.





@heading Conclusion

Personally, one of the key reasons I started this project was to learn
how much as I could about GNU Project's principles, ideas and
reasoning, so I could contemplate it in itself, which is a beautiful
thing, but beyond and more important, I could turn into a better
person, defined by the knowledge which once I hadn't, using it to help
the GNU Project itself and people like me, which just need an
opportunity to see the truth, and then will not miss it nor disappoint
you, making a difference to the world.

If the GNU Project approves my submission I will be glad in doing
whatever is possible to build the technical infrastructure and the
community around it so we can work together for the betterment of GNU.
Hopefully, this package success means a great deal of success to GNU.
To make GNU successful is my goal and one of the things the world
needs most for now.
