@c
@c make-help-suffixes.texi -- Build System Help: Goal suffixes;
@c
@c Copyright (C) 2010, 2013, 2014 Bruno Félix Rezende Ribeiro
@c <oitofelix@gnu.org>
@c
@c Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
@c document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
@c Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
@c Foundation; with no Invariant Sections.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU Free Documentation
@c License along with this program.  If not, see
@c <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
@c

@c %**start of header
@ifclear manual
@setfilename make-help-suffixes
@documentencoding UTF-8
@c @documentlanguage en_US
@firstparagraphindent insert
@c @footnotestyle end
@c @settitle Goal suffixes
@end ifclear
@include release.texi
@c %**end of header





@c --- homepage: Navigation bar;
@ifset homepage
@include navigation.texi
@end ifset





@c --- file: Copying notice;
@c @ifset file
@c @set FILE make-help-suffixes
@c @include copying.texi
@c @insertcopying
@c @end ifset





@ifset help
@centerchap Build System Help: Goal suffixes
@end ifset

@ifclear help
@smallindentedblock
This particular text can be seen by running @samp{make help-suffixes}.
@end smallindentedblock
@end ifclear

Each available goal is comprised of a @dfn{primary}, which gives its
general and essential meaning --- as @emph{build essays} (@samp{all})
or @emph{clean the build tree} (@samp{all-clean}) --- and an optional
set of suffixes which specializes the meaning of the primary they are
appended to.  There are three different kind of suffixes:
@emph{aggregate}, @emph{format} and @emph{language}.

The @dfn{aggregate suffix type} specifies which kind of aggregate
should be acted upon: @emph{collection} or @emph{standalone}.  The
former gathers all essays in a single document, and the latter puts
each one on its own document.

The @dfn{format suffix type} specifies an output format, like
@emph{Info} or @emph{PDF} for the correspondent aggregate.  The valid
format suffixes are:

@table @samp
@item info
GNU Info format
@item html
HyperText Markup Language
@item pdf
Portable Document Format
@item dvi
Device Independent File
@item ps
PostScript
@item txt
Plain Text
@item dbk
Docbook
@item xml
Extensible Markup Language
@end table

The @dfn{language suffix type} allows one to select the translation
language one wants to act upon.  It's a language code like @samp{en}
or @samp{pt_BR}.  Currently, the valid language suffixes are:

@table @samp
@item en
English
@end table

All suffixes should be prepended by @samp{-}.  For instance, being
@samp{all} the primary used to build essays, in order to tell the
build system to compile a collection in Info format and Brazilian
Portuguese language, one would use the goal
@samp{all-collection-info-pt_BR}.

In this help text, when listing the available goals, we denote the
support for a particular suffix type by the @samp{[@var{a}]},
@samp{[@var{f}]} and @samp{[@var{l}]} symbols, meaning aggregate,
format and language suffixes, respectively.  All suffixes are optional
and you can specify any combination of them, but you must always
respect that exact ordering.

Omitting a suffix causes the build system to process the correspondent
goal for all valid suffixes of the omitted type.  For example, the
goal @samp{all-standalone-pdf-en} is as specific as one can get and it
tells to build standalone aggregates in PDF format and English
language.  To be more general one can omit any desired suffix of the
type one want to generalize upon.  For instance, the goal
@samp{all-standalone-pdf} builds PDF standalone aggregates for all
languages, because the language suffix type was omitted.  One could
omit the format suffix instead, like in @samp{all-standalone-en}, and
then all the standalone aggregates in all formats, but only for
English language, would be built.  Analogously, the goal
@samp{all-standalone} builds standalone for every available language,
in every supported format, because both suffix were omitted.  Finally,
@samp{all} is equivalent to @samp{all-collection all-standalone},
i.e., it builds both aggregate types for every language and format
available.

If your shell support brace expansion (@pxref{Brace Expansion,,,bash,
GNU Bash manual})@footnote{If not, time has come to upgrade to
@url{https://www.gnu.org/software/bash, GNU Bash!}} an useful trick is
to use it to specify multiple goals combinations by a single
meta-goal.  For instance, to build Info and PDF collections for all
available languages one can use the meta-goal
@samp{all-collection-@{info,pdf@}}.  More powerfully, if one wants to
build based on those same settings but just for two specified
languages, let's say English and Brazilian Portuguese, one would
rather use @samp{all-collection-@{info,pdf@}-@{en,pt_BR@}}.





@c --- homepage: Footer;
@ifset homepage
@include footer.texi
@end ifset
