@c
@c make-help.texi -- Build System Help: Make interface;
@c
@c Copyright (C) 2010, 2013, 2014 Bruno Félix Rezende Ribeiro
@c <oitofelix@gnu.org>
@c
@c Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
@c document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
@c Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
@c Foundation; with no Invariant Sections.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU Free Documentation
@c License along with this program.  If not, see
@c <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
@c

@c %**start of header
@ifclear manual
@setfilename make-help
@documentencoding UTF-8
@c @documentlanguage en_US
@firstparagraphindent insert
@c @footnotestyle end
@c @settitle Make interface
@end ifclear
@include release.texi
@c %**end of header





@c --- homepage: Navigation bar;
@ifset homepage
@include navigation.texi
@end ifset





@c --- file: Copying notice;
@c @ifset file
@c @set FILE make-help
@c @include copying.texi
@c @insertcopying
@c @end ifset





@ifset help
@centerchap Build System Help: Make interface
@end ifset

@ifclear help
@smallindentedblock
This particular text can be seen by running @samp{make help}.
@end smallindentedblock
@end ifclear

As soon as the @command{configure} script finishes its execution, the
build system is instantiated so you can use the command @command{make}
to tell the build system what task you want done.  In order to do that
you can run @samp{make @var{goal}}, where @var{goal} is one of the
supported goals.  Actually, @command{make} accepts an arbitrary list
of goals at once, separated by blanks, in which case it will strive to
accomplish each of them.

This package's build system has a help mechanism which will assist you
through the build and installation process, as well as instruct you
about all relevant goals.  Throughout its help documentation you are
pointed to specific help topics --- denoted by @samp{help-@var{topic}}
--- which you can visualize by running @samp{make help-@var{topic}},
where @var{topic} is the topic at hand.

This package has a somewhat different set of make goals and rules one
would expect from an ordinary GNU software package.  The help
documentation describes the most general function of each available
goal, whose meaning often can be further specialized by the use of
suffixes.  See @samp{help-suffixes}.  You can obtain further help in
the following topics.

@table @samp
@item help-build
Building;
@item help-install
Installation;
@item help-clean
Cleaning;
@item help-dist
Distribution;
@end table





@c --- homepage: Footer;
@ifset homepage
@include footer.texi
@end ifset
