@c
@c make-help-build.texi -- Build System Help: Build;
@c
@c Copyright (C) 2010, 2013, 2014 Bruno Félix Rezende Ribeiro
@c <oitofelix@gnu.org>
@c
@c Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
@c document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
@c Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
@c Foundation; with no Invariant Sections.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU Free Documentation
@c License along with this program.  If not, see
@c <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
@c

@c %**start of header
@ifclear manual
@setfilename make-help-build
@documentencoding UTF-8
@c @documentlanguage en_US
@firstparagraphindent insert
@c @footnotestyle end
@c @settitle Build
@end ifclear
@include release.texi
@c %**end of header





@c --- homepage: Navigation bar;
@ifset homepage
@include navigation.texi
@end ifset





@c --- file: Copying notice;
@c @ifset file
@c @set FILE make-help-build
@c @include copying.texi
@c @insertcopying
@c @end ifset





@ifset help
@centerchap Build System Help: Make interface
@end ifset

@ifclear help
@smallindentedblock
This particular text can be seen by running @samp{make help-build}.
@end smallindentedblock
@end ifclear

After the configuration step@inlineifclear{help, @comma{} as described
in @ref{Configuration}@comma{}} is complete, it is time to build the package.
The primary used for this is @samp{all[@var{a}][@var{f}][@var{l}]}.
Therefore to build all collection and standalone formats, in all
available languages, invoke @samp{make all} (or simply @samp{make}).
As explained in @inlineifclear{help, @ref{Goal
suffixes}}@inlineifset{help, @samp{help-suffixes}}, you can further
specify the build by using any combination of @emph{aggregate},
@emph{format} and @emph{language} suffixes.

There are two special @command{make} goals which aid GNU philosophy
maintainers: @samp{www-gnu[@var{l}]} and @samp{homepage[@var{l}]}.
The former build all @url{https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/, GNU website
philosophy section essays}, and the latter the
@url{https://www.gnu.org/software/philosophy/, homepage of GNU
philosophy package}.

The silent rules of @command{make} are enabled by default.  Therefore,
you will see just one line for each file @command{make} builds, since
the output of recipes is suppressed.  That is a reasonable behavior
unless you have problems in the build process.  On that case you
probably will need the full output of @command{make} to be able to
debug the problem.  To do that at @command{make} time, pass @samp{V=1}
as an argument to @command{make} when building the targets that causes
problem.  To disable silent rules at @command{configure} time use the
configure option @option{--disable-silent-rules}.





@c --- homepage: Footer;
@ifset homepage
@include footer.texi
@end ifset
