@c Copyright (C) 2006, 2007 Richard Stallman
@c
@c Permission is granted to anyone to make or distribute verbatim copies
@c of this document, in any medium, provided that the copyright notice and
@c permission notice are preserved, and that the distributor grants the
@c recipient permission for further redistribution as permitted by this
@c notice.
@c
@c Modified versions of the subject matter text may not be made.  You
@c are only allowed to modify the markup.

@include essay-header.texi

@c --- Original publication notice;
@macro essayPreNotice
The BBC invited me to write an article for their column series,
@cite{The Tech Lab,} and this is what I sent them. (It refers to a
couple of other articles published in that series.) The BBC was
ultimately unwilling to publish it with a copying-permission notice,
so I published it on @url{http://gnu.org}, in 2007.
@end macro

@c --- Copyright notice;
@macro essayCopyright
Copyright @copyright{} 2006, 2007 Richard Stallman
@end macro

@c --- Setup standard essay defaults;
@essayHeader{computing-progress-good-and-bad,
Computing ``Progress''; Good and Bad,
Computing ``Progress'': Good and Bad}





@noindent
@cindex Horowitz, Bradley
@cindex UK
@rgindex Big Brother
@cindex New Labour
@cindex China
@cindex Yahoo
@rgindex proprietary software, spying on users
Bradley Horowitz of Yahoo proposed here@footnote{Bradley Horowitz,
``The Tech Lab: Bradley Horowitz,'' @cite{BBC News,}
29@tie{}June@tie{}2007,
@url{http://news.@/bbc.@/co.@/uk/@/2/@/hi/@/technology/@/6252716.@/stm}.}
that every object in our world have a unique number so that your cell
phone could record everything you do---even which cans you picked up
while in the supermarket.

If the phone is like today's phones, it will use proprietary software:
software controlled by the companies that developed it, not by its
users. Those companies will ensure that your phone makes the
information it collects about you available to the phone company's
database (let's call it Big Brother) and probably to other
companies.

In the UK of the future, as New Labour would have it, those companies
will surely turn this information over to the police. If your phone
reports you bought a wooden stick and a piece of poster board, the
phone company's system will deduce that you may be planning a protest,
and report you automatically to the police so they can accuse you of
``terrorism.''

In the UK, it is literally an offense to be suspect---more precisely,
to possess any object in circumstances that create a ``reasonable
suspicion'' that you might use it in certain criminal ways. Your
phone will give the police plenty of opportunities to suspect you so
they can charge you with having been suspected by them. Similar
things will happen in China, where Yahoo has already given the
government all the information it needed to imprison a dissident; it
subsequently asked for our understanding on the excuse that it was
``just following orders.''

@rgindex cell phones @emph{(see also both} OpenMoko @emph{and} Apple@emph{)}
Horowitz would like cell phones to tag information automatically,
based on knowing when you participate in an event or meeting. That
means the phone company will also know precisely whom you meet. That
information will also be interesting to governments, such as those of
the UK and China, that cut corners on human rights.

I do not much like Horowitz's vision of total surveillance. Rather, I
envision a world in which our computers never collect, or release, any
information about us except when we want them to.

@rgindex DRM, call it ``Digital Restrictions Management''
Nonfree software does other nasty things besides spying; it often
implements digital handcuffs---features designed to restrict the users
(also called DRM, for Digital Restrictions Management). These features
control how you can access, copy, or move the files in your own
computer.

DRM is a common practice:
@cindex DRM, and Microsoft
Microsoft does it,
@cindex DRM, and Apple
Apple does it,
@cindex DRM, and Google
Google
does it, even the
@cindex DRM, and BBC iPlayer
@cindex iPlayer, BBC @emph{(see also} DRM@emph{)}
BBC's iPlayer does it. Many governments, taking the
side of these companies against the public, have made it illegal to
tell others how to escape from the digital handcuffs. As a result,
competition does nothing to check the practice: no matter how many
proprietary alternatives you might have to choose from, they will all
handcuff you just the same. If the computer knows where you are
located, it can make DRM even worse: there are companies that would
like to restrict what you can access based on your present location.
@rgindex DRM, call it ``Digital Restrictions Management''

My vision of the world is different. I would like to see a world in
which all the software in our computers --- in our desktop PCs, our
laptops, our handhelds, our phones --- is under our control and
respects our freedom. In other words, a world where all software is
@emph{free} software.

Free software, freedom-respecting software, means that every user of
the program is free to get the program's source code and change the
program to do what she wants, and also free to give away or sell
copies, either exact or modified. This means the users are in
control. With the users in control of the software, nobody has power
to impose nasty features on others.

Even if you don't exercise this control yourself, you are part of a
society where others do. If you are not a programmer, other users of
the program are. They will probably find and remove any nasty
features, which might spy on or restrict you, and publish safe
versions. You will have only to elect to use them---and since
all other users will prefer them, that will usually happen with no
effort on your part.

@cindex Stross, Charles
Charles Stross envisioned computers that permanently record everything
that we see and hear.@footnote{Charles Stross, ``The Tech Lab: Charles
Stross,'' @cite{BBC News,} 10@tie{}July@tie{}2007,
@url{http://news.@/bbc.@/co.@/uk/@/2/@/hi/@/technology/@/6287126.@/stm}.}
Those records could be very useful, as long as Big Brother doesn't see
and hear all of them. Today's cell phones are already capable of
listening to their users without informing them, at the request of the
police, the phone company, or anyone that knows the requisite
commands. As long as phones use nonfree software, controlled by its
developers and not by the users, we must expect this to get
worse. Only free software enables computer-using citizens to resist
totalitarian surveillance.
@rgindex cell phones @emph{(see also both} OpenMoko @emph{and} Apple@emph{)}

@cindex Winer, Dave
Dave Winer's article@footnote{Dave Winer, ``The Tech Lab: Dave
Winer,'' @cite{BBC News,} 14@tie{}June@tie{}2007,
@url{http://news.@/bbc.@/co.@/uk/@/2/@/hi/@/technology/@/6748103.@/stm}.}
suggested that Mr.
@cindex Gates, Bill
Gates should send a copy of
@cindex Windows, Vista
@cindex Vista, Windows @emph{(see also both} Windows @emph{and} DRM@emph{)}
Windows Vista to
@cindex Alpha Centauri
Alpha Centauri. I understand the feeling, but sending just one won't
solve our problem here on Earth. Windows is designed to spy on users
and restrict them. We should collect all the copies of
@cindex DRM, and Windows
Windows, and of
@cindex DRM, and MacOS
@cindex MacOS @emph{(see also} DRM@emph{)}
MacOS and
@cindex DRM, and BBC iPlayer
@cindex iPlayer, BBC @emph{(see also} DRM@emph{)}
iPlayer for the same reason, and send
them to Alpha Centauri at the slowest possible speed. Or just erase
them.
@rgindex Big Brother
@rgindex proprietary software, spying on users
