@c Copyright (C) 1983 Richard Stallman
@c
@c Permission is granted to anyone to make or distribute verbatim copies
@c of this document, in any medium, provided that the copyright notice and
@c permission notice are preserved, and that the distributor grants the
@c recipient permission for further redistribution as permitted by this
@c notice.
@c
@c Modified versions of the subject matter text may not be made.  You
@c are only allowed to modify the markup.

@include essay-header.texi

@c --- Original publication notice;
@macro essayPreNotice
This is the original announcement of the GNU Project, posted by
Richard Stallman on 27@tie{}September@tie{}1983.  The actual history
of the GNU Project differs in many ways from this initial plan. For
example, the beginning was delayed until January 1984. Several of the
philosophical concepts of free software were not clarified until a few
years later.
@end macro

@c --- Copyright notice;
@macro essayCopyright
Copyright @copyright{} 1983 Richard Stallman
@end macro

@c --- Setup standard essay defaults;
@essayHeader{the-initial-announcement-of-the-gnu-operating-system,
The Initial Announcement of the GNU Operating System,
The Initial Announcement of the GNU@tie{}Operating@tie{}System}





@rgindex GNU, initial announcement
@rgindex MIT
@cindex Unix compatibility, announcement of
@cindex RMS, Richard Stallman, often referred to as @emph{(see also} Stallman@emph{)}
@cindex GNU, operating system parts
@cindex Empire game
@cindex games, Empire
@cindex C programs
@cindex C compiler
@cindex yacc
@cartouche
@verbatim
From mit-vax!mit-eddie!RMS@@MIT-OZ
From: RMS%MIT-OZ@@mit-eddie
Newsgroups: net.unix-wizards,net.usoft
Subject: new Unix implementation
Date: Tue, 27-Sep-83 12:35:59 EST
Organization: MIT AI Lab, Cambridge, MA
@end verbatim
@end cartouche

@essayHeading Free Unix!

Starting this Thanksgiving I am going to write a complete
Unix-compatible software system called GNU (for Gnu's Not Unix), and
give it away free@footnote{The wording here was careless.  The
intention was that nobody would have to pay for @emph{permission} to
use the GNU system.  But the words don't make this clear, and people
often interpret them as saying that copies of GNU should always be
distributed at little or no charge.  That was never the intent.} to
everyone who can use it.  Contributions of time, money, programs and
equipment are greatly needed.

To begin with, GNU will be a kernel plus all the utilities needed to
write and run C programs: editor, shell, C compiler, linker,
assembler, and a few other things.  After this we will add a text
formatter, a YACC, an Empire game, a spreadsheet, and hundreds of
other things.  We hope to supply, eventually, everything useful that
normally comes with a Unix system, and anything else useful, including
on-line and hardcopy documentation.

@cindex Chaosnet @emph{(see also} MIT@emph{)}
@cindex MIT, Chaosnet
@cindex UUCP
@cindex Lisp, programs
@cindex Lisp, Lisp-based window system
@cindex MIT, Chaosnet
GNU will be able to run Unix programs, but will not be identical to
Unix.  We will make all improvements that are convenient, based on our
experience with other operating systems.  In particular, we plan to
have longer filenames, file version numbers, a crashproof file system,
filename completion perhaps, terminal-independent display support, and
eventually a Lisp-based window system through which several Lisp
programs and ordinary Unix programs can share a screen.  Both C and
Lisp will be available as system programming languages.  We will have
network software based on MIT's chaosnet protocol, far superior to
UUCP.  We may also have something compatible with UUCP.

@essayHeading Who Am I?

@cindex Stallman, Richard
@cindex Emacs, GNU
@cindex GNU, GNU Emacs
@cindex MIT, AI (Artificial Intelligence) Lab
@cindex ITS (Incompatible Timesharing System)
@cindex Lisp, Lisp Machine operating system
I am Richard Stallman, inventor of the original much-imitated EMACS
editor, now at the Artificial Intelligence Lab at MIT.  I have worked
extensively on compilers, editors, debuggers, command interpreters,
the Incompatible Timesharing System and the Lisp Machine operating
system.  I pioneered terminal-independent display support in ITS.  In
addition I have implemented one crashproof file system and two window
systems for Lisp machines.

@essayHeading Why I Must Write GNU

@cindex Golden Rule
@cindex citizen values, Golden Rule
@cindex nondisclosure agreements
I consider that the golden rule requires that if I like a program I
must share it with other people who like it.  I cannot in good
conscience sign a nondisclosure agreement or a software license
agreement.

So that I can continue to use computers without violating my
principles, I have decided to put together a sufficient body of free
software so that I will be able to get along without any software that
is not free.

@essayHeading How You Can Contribute

@cindex development, contributions and donations
@cindex call to action, initial announcement
I am asking computer manufacturers for donations of machines and
money.  I'm asking individuals for donations of programs and work.

One computer manufacturer has already offered to provide a machine.
But we could use more.  One consequence you can expect if you donate
machines is that GNU will run on them at an early date.  The machine
had better be able to operate in a residential area, and not require
sophisticated cooling or power.

@cindex Unix compatibility, ease of contribution because of
Individual programmers can contribute by writing a compatible
duplicate of some Unix utility and giving it to me.  For most
projects, such part-time distributed work would be very hard to
coordinate; the independently-written parts would not work together.
But for the particular task of replacing Unix, this problem is absent.
Most interface specifications are fixed by Unix compatibility.  If
each contribution works with the rest of Unix, it will probably work
with the rest of GNU.

If I get donations of money, I may be able to hire a few people full
or part time.  The salary won't be high, but I'm looking for people
for whom knowing they are helping humanity is as important as money.
I view this as a way of enabling dedicated people to devote their full
energies to working on GNU by sparing them the need to make a living
in another way.

@sp 1
@noindent
For more information, contact me.

@cartouche
@verbatim
Arpanet mail:
  RMS@MIT-MC.ARPA

Usenet:
  ...!mit-eddie!RMS@OZ
  ...!mit-vax!RMS@OZ

US Snail:
  Richard Stallman
  166 Prospect St
  Cambridge, MA 02139
@end verbatim
@end cartouche
@rgindex MIT
@rgindex GNU, initial announcement
@rgindex MIT
