@c Copyright (C) 2008, 2010 Richard Stallman
@c
@c Permission is granted to anyone to make or distribute verbatim copies
@c of this document, in any medium, provided that the copyright notice and
@c permission notice are preserved, and that the distributor grants the
@c recipient permission for further redistribution as permitted by this
@c notice.
@c
@c Modified versions of the subject matter text may not be made.  You
@c are only allowed to modify the markup.

@include essay-header.texi

@c --- Original publication notice;
@macro essayPreNotice
This article was first published in the March/April 2008 issue of
@url{http://bostonreview.net} and is a response to Jonathan Zittrain's
``Protecting the Internet without Wrecking It,'' which was published
in the same issue and is available at
@url{http://bostonreview.@/net/@/BR33.@/2/@/zittrain.@/php}.
@end macro

@c --- Copyright notice;
@macro essayCopyright
Copyright @copyright{} 2008, 2010 Richard Stallman
@end macro

@c --- Setup standard essay defaults;
@essayHeader{the-problem-is-software-controlled-by-its-developer,
The Problem Is Software Controlled by Its Developer,
The Problem Is Software Controlled by Its@tie{}Developer}





@noindent
@rgindex Zittrain, Jonathan
I fully agree with Jonathan Zittrain's conclusion that we should not
abandon general-purpose computers. Alas, I disagree completely with
the path that led him to it. He presents serious security problems as
an intolerable crisis, but I'm not convinced. Then he forecasts that
users will panic in response and stampede toward restricted computers
(which he calls ``appliances''), but there is no sign of this
happening.

@cindex zombie machines
@cindex phishing
Zombie machines are a problem, but not a catastrophe. Moreover, far
from panicking, most users ignore the issue. Today, people are indeed
concerned about the danger of phishing (mail and web pages that
solicit personal information for fraud), but using a browsing-only
device instead of a general computer won't protect you from that.

@rgindex Apple, iPhone @emph{(see also} cell phones@emph{)}
Meanwhile, Apple has reported that 25 percent of iPhones have been
unlocked. Surely at least as many users would have preferred an
unlocked iPhone but were afraid to try a forbidden recipe to obtain
it. This refutes the idea that users generally prefer that their
devices be locked.

@rgindex RealPlayer @emph{(see also} DRM@emph{)}
@rgindex Adobe Flash
@cindex proprietary software, spying on users
It is true that a general computer lets you run programs designed to
spy on you, restrict you, or even let the developer attack you. Such
programs include
@rgindex KaZaA @emph{(see also both} DRM @emph{and} treacherous computing@emph{)}
KaZaA, RealPlayer, Adobe Flash,
@rgindex Windows Media Player @emph{(see also both} DRM @emph{and} treacherous computing@emph{)}
Windows Media Player,
Microsoft
@cindex Windows
Windows, and MacOS@.
@cindex Windows, Vista
@cindex Vista, Windows @emph{(see also both} Windows @emph{and} DRM@emph{)}
Windows Vista does all three of those
things; it also lets Microsoft change the software without asking, or
command it to permanently cease normal functioning.

But restricted computers are no help, because they present the
same problem for the same reason.

The iPhone is designed for remote attack by Apple. When Apple remotely
destroys iPhones that users have unlocked to enable other uses, that
is no better than when Microsoft remotely sabotages
@cindex Vista, Windows @emph{(see also both} Windows @emph{and} DRM@emph{)}
Vista. The
@cindex TiVo @emph{(see also} tivoization@emph{)}
@cindex tivoization
TiVo is
designed to enforce restrictions on access to the recordings you make,
and reports what you watch.
@cindex e-books
E-book readers such as the
@cindex Amazon
Amazon
@cindex Swindle
``Swindle'' are designed to stop you from sharing and lending your
books. Features that artificially obstruct use of your data are known
@cindex DRM, call it ``Digital Restrictions Management''
@cindex ``Digital Rights Management,'' avoid use of term @emph{(see also} DRM@emph{)}
as Digital Restrictions Management (DRM); our protest campaign against
DRM is hosted at
@cindex Defective by Design @emph{(see also} DRM@emph{)}
@url{http://defectivebydesign.org}. (Our adversaries call DRM
``Digital Rights Management'' based on their idea that restricting you
is their right. When you choose a term, you choose your side.)

The nastiest of the common restricted devices are
@cindex cell phones @emph{(see also both} OpenMoko @emph{and} Apple@emph{)}
cell phones. They
transmit signals for tracking your whereabouts even when switched
``off''; the only way to stop this is to take out all the
batteries. Many can also be turned on remotely, for listening,
unbeknownst to you. (The
@cindex FBI
FBI is already taking advantage of this
feature, and the
@cindex Commerce Department, US
US Commerce Department lists this danger in its
Security Guide.) Cellular phone network companies regularly install
software in users phones, without asking, to impose new usage
restrictions.

With a general computer you can escape by rejecting such programs. You
don't have to have KaZaA, RealPlayer, Adobe Flash,
@rgindex Windows Media Player @emph{(see also both} DRM @emph{and} treacherous computing@emph{)}
Windows Media
Player, Microsoft Windows or
@cindex MacOS @emph{(see also} DRM@emph{)}
MacOS on your computer (I don't). By
contrast, a restricted computer gives you no escape from the software
built into it.
@rgindex KaZaA @emph{(see also both} DRM @emph{and} treacherous computing@emph{)}
@rgindex Adobe Flash
@rgindex RealPlayer @emph{(see also} DRM@emph{)}

@cindex development, developer control
The root of this problem, both in general PCs and restricted
computers, is software controlled by its developer. The developer
(typically a corporation) controls what the program does, and prevents
everyone else from changing it. If the developer decides to put in
malicious features, even a master programmer cannot easily remove
them.

@cindex users, benefit to
@cindex call to action, insist on free software
The remedy is to give the users more control, not less. We must insist
on free/libre software, software that the users are free to change and
redistribute. Free/libre software develops under the control of its
users: if they don't like its features, for whatever reason, they can
change them. If you're not a programmer, you still get the benefit of
control by the users. A programmer can make the improvements you would
like, and publish the changed version. Then you can use it too.

@rgindex malware
With free/libre software, no one has the power to make a malicious
feature stick. Since the source code is available to the users,
millions of programmers are in a position to spot and remove the
malicious feature and release an improved version; surely someone
will do it. Others can then compare the two versions
to verify independently which version treats users right. As a practical
fact, free software is generally free of designed-in malware.

@rgindex call to action, price deception
Many people do acquire restricted devices, but not for motives of
security. Why do people choose them?

Sometimes it is because the restricted devices are physically
smaller. I edit text all day (literally) and I find the keyboard and
screen of a laptop well worth the size and weight. However, people who
use computers differently may prefer something that fits in a
pocket. In the past, these devices have typically been restricted, but
they weren't chosen for that reason.

Now they are becoming less restricted. In fact, the
@cindex OpenMoko @emph{(see also} cell phones@emph{)}
OpenMoko cell
phone features a main computer running entirely free/libre software,
including the GNU/Linux operating system normally used on PCs and
servers.

@cindex games, price deception and
A major cause for the purchase of some restricted computers is
financial sleight of hand. Game consoles, and the iPhone, are sold for an
unsustainably low price, and the manufacturers subsequently charge when you use
them. Thus, game developers must pay the game console manufacturer to
distribute a game, and they pass this cost on to the
user. Likewise,
@cindex AT&T
AT&T pays Apple when an iPhone is used as a
telephone. The low up-front price misleads customers into thinking
they will save money.
@rgindex Apple, iPhone @emph{(see also} cell phones@emph{)}

If we are concerned about the spread of restricted computers, we
should tackle the issue of the price deception that sells them.
If we are concerned about malware, we should insist on free
software that gives the users control.
@rgindex call to action, price deception
@rgindex malware





@essayHeading Postnote

@cindex development, patents
Zittrain's suggestion to reduce the statute of limitations
on software patent lawsuits is a tiny step in the right direction, but
it is much easier to solve the whole problem. Software patents are an
unnecessary, artificial danger imposed on all software developers and
users in the US@. Every program is a combination of many methods and
techniques---thousands of them in a large program. If patenting these
methods is allowed, then hundreds of those used in a given program are
probably patented. (Avoiding them is not feasible; there may be no
alternatives, or the alternatives may be patented too.) So the
developers of the program face hundreds of potential lawsuits from
parties unknown, and the users can be sued as well.

The complete, simple solution is to eliminate patents from the field
of software. Since the patent system is created by statute, eliminating
patents from software will be easy given sufficient political
will. (See @url{http://www.@/endsoftpatents.@/org}.)
@rgindex Zittrain, Jonathan
