@c Copyright (C) 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004,
@c               2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009
@c               Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c
@c Permission is granted to anyone to make or distribute verbatim copies
@c of this document, in any medium, provided that the copyright notice and
@c permission notice are preserved, and that the distributor grants the
@c recipient permission for further redistribution as permitted by this
@c notice.
@c
@c Modified versions of the subject matter text may not be made.  You
@c are only allowed to modify the markup.

@include essay-header.texi

@c --- Original publication notice;
@macro essayPreNotice
This essay was originally published on @url{http://gnu.org}, in 1996.
@end macro

@c --- Copyright notice;
@macro essayCopyright
Copyright @copyright{} 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003,
2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@end macro

@c --- Setup standard essay defaults;
@essayHeader{what-is-copyleft,
What Is Copyleft?,
What Is Copyleft?}





@rgindex GPL
@rgindex copyleft @emph{(see also} copyright@emph{)}
@rgindex copylefted software @emph{(see also} software@emph{)}
@noindent
Copyleft is a general method for making a program (or other work)
free, and requiring all modified and extended versions of the program
to be free as well.

@cindex public domain software @emph{(see also} software@emph{)}
The simplest way to make a program free software is to put it in the
public domain, uncopyrighted. This allows people to
share the program and their improvements, if they are so minded. But
it also allows uncooperative people to convert the program into
proprietary software. They can make changes, many or few,
and distribute the result as a proprietary product. People who
receive the program in that modified form do not have the freedom that
the original author gave them; the middleman has stripped it away.

In the GNU Project, our aim is
to give @emph{all} users the freedom to redistribute and change GNU
software. If middlemen could strip off the freedom, we might have
many users, but those users would not have freedom. So instead of
putting GNU software in the public domain, we ``copyleft''
it. Copyleft says that anyone who redistributes the software, with or
without changes, must pass along the freedom to further copy and
change it. Copyleft guarantees that every user has freedom.

Copyleft also provides an incentive for other programmers to add to
free software. Important free programs such as the
@cindex GNU, GNU C++ compiler
GNU C++ compiler
exist only because of this.

Copyleft also helps programmers who want to contribute improvements to
free software get permission to
do so. These programmers often work for companies or universities
that would do almost anything to get more money. A programmer may
want to contribute her changes to the community, but her employer may
want to turn the changes into a proprietary software product.

When we explain to the employer that it is illegal to distribute the
improved version except as free software, the employer usually decides
to release it as free software rather than throw it away.

To copyleft a program, we first state that it is copyrighted; then we
add distribution terms, which are a legal instrument that gives
everyone the rights to use, modify, and redistribute the program's
code, @emph{or any program derived from it,} but only if the
distribution terms are unchanged. Thus, the code and the freedoms
become legally inseparable.

Proprietary software developers use copyright to take away the users'
freedom; we use copyright to guarantee their freedom. That's why we
reverse the name, changing ``copyright'' into
``copyleft.''

Copyleft is a way of using of the copyright on the program. It
doesn't mean abandoning the copyright; in fact, doing so would make
copyleft impossible. The ``left'' in
``copyleft'' is not a reference to the verb ``to
leave''---only to the direction which is the inverse of
``right.''

Copyleft is a general concept, and you can't use a general concept
directly; you can only use a specific implementation of the concept.
In the GNU Project, the specific distribution terms that we use for
most software are contained in the
@essayCite{gnu-general-public-license,
GNU General Public License,
GNU General Public License}. The GNU General Public License is often called the GNU GPL
for short. There is also a Frequently Asked Questions page about the
GNU GPL, at @url{http://gnu.@/org/@/licenses/@/gpl-faq.@/html}. You
can also read about why the FSF gets copyright assignments from
contributors, at
@url{http://gnu.@/org/@/copyleft/@/why-assign.@/html}.

@cindex libraries (comp.@:), LGPL and
@cindex LGPL, and GNU libraries
@cindex GNU, GNU libraries
@cindex libraries (comp.@:), GNU
An alternate form of copyleft, the
@essayCite{gnu-lesser-general-public-license,
GNU Lesser General Public License,
GNU Lesser General Public License} (LGPL), applies to a few (but not all) GNU
libraries. To learn more about properly using the LGPL, please read
the article ``Why You Shouldn't Use the Lesser GPL for Your Next
Library,'' available at
@url{http://gnu.@/org/@/philosophy/@/why-not-lgpl.@/html}.

@cindex manuals, FDL and
@cindex FDL @emph{(see also both} manuals @emph{and} documentation@emph{)}
The @essayCite{gnu-free-documentation-license,
GNU Free Documentation License,
GNU Free Documentation License} (FDL) is a form of copyleft intended for use on a manual,
textbook or other document to assure everyone the effective freedom to
copy and redistribute it, with or without modifications, either
commercially or noncommercially.

The appropriate license is included in many manuals and in each GNU
source code distribution.

All these licenses are designed so that you can easily apply them to
your own works, assuming you are the copyright holder. You don't have
to modify the license to do this, just include a copy of the license
in the work, and add notices in the source files that refer properly
to the license.

@cindex LGPL, altering distribution terms to GPL
Using the same distribution terms for many different programs makes it
easy to copy code between various different programs. When they all
have the same distribution terms, there is no problem. The Lesser
GPL, version 2, includes a provision that lets you alter the
distribution terms to the ordinary GPL, so that you can copy code into
another program covered by the GPL@. Version 3 of the Lesser GPL is
built as an exception added to GPL version 3, making the compatibility
automatic.

If you would like to copyleft your program with the GNU GPL or the GNU
LGPL, please see the license instructions page, at
@url{http://gnu.@/org/@/copyleft/@/gpl-howto.@/html}, for advice.
Please note that you must use the entire text of the license you
choose. Each is an integral whole, and partial copies are not
permitted.

If you would like to copyleft your manual with the GNU FDL, please see
the instructions at the end of the FDL text, and the GFDL instructions
page, at @url{http://gnu.org/@/copyleft/@/fdl-howto.@/html}. Again,
partial copies are not permitted.
@rgindex copylefted software @emph{(see also} software@emph{)}
@rgindex copyleft @emph{(see also} copyright@emph{)}
@rgindex GPL
