@c Copyright (C) 2007, 2008, 2010 Richard Stallman
@c
@c Permission is granted to anyone to make or distribute verbatim copies
@c of this document, in any medium, provided that the copyright notice and
@c permission notice are preserved, and that the distributor grants the
@c recipient permission for further redistribution as permitted by this
@c notice.
@c
@c Modified versions of the subject matter text may not be made.  You
@c are only allowed to modify the markup.

@include essay-header.texi

@c --- Original publication notice;
@macro essayPreNotice
This essay was originally published on @url{http://gnu.org}, in 2007.
@end macro

@c --- Copyright notice;
@macro essayCopyright
Copyright @copyright{} 2007, 2008, 2010 Richard Stallman
@end macro

@c --- Setup standard essay defaults;
@essayHeader{why-open-source-misses-the-point-of-free-software,
Why Open Source Misses the Point of Free Software,
Why Open Source Misses the Point of Free Software}





@rgindex open source software @emph{(see also} software@emph{)}
@rgindex terminology, importance of using correct
@rgindex free software, essential difference between open source and
@rgindex open source, essential difference between free software and

@noindent
When we call software ``free,'' we mean that it respects the users'
essential freedoms: the freedom to run it, to study and change it, and
to redistribute copies with or without changes. This is a matter of
freedom, not price, so think of ``free speech,'' not ``free beer.''

These freedoms are vitally important. They are essential, not just for
the individual users' sake, but for society as a whole because they
promote social solidarity---that is, sharing and cooperation. They
become even more important as our culture and life activities are
increasingly digitized. In a world of digital sounds, images, and
words, free software becomes increasingly essential for freedom in
general.

@rgindex India
Tens of millions of people around the world now use free software; the
public schools of some regions of India and
@cindex Spain
Spain now teach all students to use the free GNU/Linux operating
system. Most of these users, however, have never heard of the ethical
reasons for which we developed this system and built the free software
community, because nowadays this system and community are more often
spoken of as ``open source,'' attributing them to a different
philosophy in which these freedoms are hardly mentioned.

@rgindex free software movement @emph{(see also} GNU Project@emph{)}
The free software movement has campaigned for computer users' freedom
since 1983. In 1984 we launched the development of the free operating
system GNU, so that we could avoid the nonfree operating systems that
deny freedom to their users. During the 1980s, we developed most of
the essential components of the system and designed the GNU General
Public License (GNU GPL) to release them under---a license designed
specifically to protect freedom for all users of a program.

@rgindex ``open source,'' values of
Not all of the users and developers of free software agreed with the
goals of the free software movement. In 1998, a part of the free
software community splintered off and began campaigning in the name of
``open source.'' The term was originally proposed to avoid a possible
misunderstanding of the term ``free software,'' but it soon became
associated with philosophical views quite different from those of the
free software movement.

@cindex citizen values, open source v.@: free software
Some of the supporters of open source considered the term a
``marketing campaign for free software,'' which would appeal to
business executives by highlighting the software's practical benefits,
while not raising issues of right and wrong that they might not like
to hear. Other supporters flatly rejected the free software movement's
ethical and social values. Whichever their views, when campaigning for
open source, they neither cited nor advocated those values. The term
``open source'' quickly became associated with ideas and arguments
based only on practical values, such as making or having powerful,
reliable software. Most of the supporters of open source have come to
it since then, and they make the same association.

Nearly all open source software is free software. The two terms
describe almost the same category of software, but they stand for
views based on fundamentally different values. Open source is a
development methodology; free software is a social movement. For the
free software movement, free software is an ethical imperative,
because only free software respects the users' freedom. By contrast,
the philosophy of open source considers issues in terms of how to make
software ``better''---in a practical sense only. It says that nonfree
software is an inferior solution to the practical problem at hand.
For the free software movement, however, nonfree software is a social
problem, and the solution is to stop using it and move to free
software.

@cindex call to action, teach others to value freedom
@cindex call to action, use correct terminology @emph{(see also} terminology@emph{)}
``Free software.'' ``Open source.'' If it's the same software, does it
matter which name you use? Yes, because different words convey
different ideas. While a free program by any other name would give you
the same freedom today, establishing freedom in a lasting way depends
above all on teaching people to value freedom. If you want to help do
this, it is essential to speak of ``free software.''

We in the free software movement don't think of the open source camp
as an enemy; the enemy is proprietary (nonfree) software. But we want
people to know we stand for freedom, so we do not accept being
mislabeled as open source supporters.
@rgindex ``open source,'' values of
@rgindex free software, essential difference between open source and
@rgindex open source, essential difference between free software and
@rgindex open source software @emph{(see also} software@emph{)}





@essayHeading Common Misunderstandings of ``Free Software'' and ``Open@tie{}Source''

@rgindex ``open source,'' common misunderstandings of
@rgindex ``free software,'' common misunderstandings of
The term ``free software'' is prone to misinterpretation: an
unintended meaning, ``software you can get for zero price,'' fits the
term just as well as the intended meaning, ``software which gives the
user certain freedoms.'' We address this problem by publishing the
definition of free software, and by saying, ``Think of `free speech,'
not `free beer.'@dmn{''} This is not a perfect solution; it cannot
completely eliminate the problem. An unambiguous and correct term
would be better, if it didn't present other problems.

@cindex ``free software,'' unambiguous translations of
Unfortunately, all the alternatives in English have problems of their
own. We've looked at many that people have suggested, but none is so
clearly ``right'' that switching to it would be a good idea. (For
instance, in some contexts the French and Spanish word ``libre'' works
well, but people in India do not recognize it at all.) Every proposed
replacement for ``free software'' has some kind of semantic
problem---and this includes ``open source software.''
@rgindex India

The official definition of ``open source software''@footnote{ See
@url{http://opensource.@/org/@/docs/@/osd} for the full definition.}
(which is published by the
@cindex Open Source Initiative (OSI)
Open Source Initiative and is too long to include here)
was derived indirectly from our criteria for free software. It is not
the same; it is a little looser in some respects, so the open source
people have accepted a few licenses that we consider unacceptably
restrictive. Also, they judge solely by the license of the source
code, whereas our criterion also considers whether a device will let
you @emph{run} your modified version of the program. Nonetheless,
their definition agrees with our definition in most cases.

However, the obvious meaning for the expression ``open source
software''---and the one most people seem to think it means---is ``You
can look at the source code.'' That criterion is much weaker than the
free software definition, much weaker also than the official
definition of open source. It includes many programs that are neither
free nor open source.

Since that obvious meaning for ``open source'' is not the meaning that
its advocates intend, the result is that most people misunderstand the
term. According to writer
@cindex Stephenson, Neal
Neal Stephenson, ``Linux is `open source' software, meaning simply,
anyone can get copies of its source code files.''@footnote{ Neal
Stephenson, @cite{In the Beginning@dots{}Was the Command Line} (New
York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1999), p.@tie{}94.} I don't think he
deliberately sought to reject or dispute the ``official''
definition. I think he simply applied the conventions of the English
language to come up with a meaning for the term. The state of
@cindex Kansas
Kansas published a similar definition: ``Make use
of open-source software (OSS). OSS is software for which the source
code is freely and publicly available, though the specific licensing
agreements vary as to what one is allowed to do with that code.''

@cindex @cite{New York Times}
The @cite{New York Times} has run an article that stretches the
meaning of the term to refer to user beta testing@footnote{Mary Jane
Irwin, ``The Brave New World of Open-Source Game Design,'' @cite{New
York Times,} online ed., 7@tie{}February@tie{}2009,
@url{http://www.@/nytimes.@/com/@/external/@/gigaom/@/2009/@/02/@/07/@/07gigaom-the-brave-new-world-of-open-source-game-@/design-37415.html}.}---letting
a few users try an early version and give confidential
feedback---which proprietary software developers have practiced for
decades.

Open source supporters try to deal with this by pointing to their
official definition, but that corrective approach is less effective
for them than it is for us. The term ``free software'' has two natural
meanings, one of which is the intended meaning, so a person who has
grasped the idea of ``free speech, not free beer'' will not get it
wrong again. But the term ``open source'' has only one natural
meaning, which is different from the meaning its supporters intend.
So there is no succinct way to explain and justify its official
definition. That makes for worse confusion.

@cindex GPL, ``open source'' and
@cindex ``open source,'' the GPL and
@cindex GPL, GPL-covered software @emph{(see also} software@emph{)}
@cindex GPL-covered software @emph{(see also} software@emph{)}
Another misunderstanding of ``open source'' is the idea that it means
``not using the GNU GPL@.'' This tends to accompany another
misunderstanding that ``free software'' means ``GPL-covered
software.'' These are both mistaken, since the GNU GPL qualifies as an
open source license and most of the open source licenses qualify as
free software licenses.

The term ``open source'' has been further stretched by its application
to other activities, such as government, education, and science, where
there is no such thing as source code, and where criteria for software
licensing are simply not pertinent. The only thing these activities
have in common is that they somehow invite people to participate.
They stretch the term so far that it only means ``participatory.''
@rgindex ``open source,'' common misunderstandings of
@rgindex ``free software,'' common misunderstandings of





@essayHeading Different Values Can Lead to Similar Conclusions@dots{} but Not@tie{}Always

Radical groups in the 1960s had a reputation for factionalism: some
organizations split because of disagreements on details of strategy,
and the two daughter groups treated each other as enemies despite
having similar basic goals and values. The right wing made much of
this and used it to criticize the entire left.

Some try to disparage the free software movement by comparing our
disagreement with open source to the disagreements of those radical
groups. They have it backwards. We disagree with the open source camp
on the basic goals and values, but their views and ours lead in many
cases to the same practical behavior---such as developing free
software.

As a result, people from the free software movement and the open
source camp often work together on practical projects such as software
development. It is remarkable that such different philosophical views
can so often motivate different people to participate in the same
projects. Nonetheless, there are situations where these fundamentally
different views lead to very different actions.

The idea of open source is that allowing users to change and
redistribute the software will make it more powerful and reliable.
But this is not guaranteed. Developers of proprietary software are not
necessarily incompetent. Sometimes they produce a program that is
powerful and reliable, even though it does not respect the users'
freedom. Free software activists and open source enthusiasts will
react very differently to that.

@cindex ``open source,'' values of
A pure open source enthusiast, one that is not at all influenced by
the ideals of free software, will say, ``I am surprised you were able
to make the program work so well without using our development model,
but you did. How can I get a copy?'' This attitude will reward schemes
that take away our freedom, leading to its loss.

The free software activist will say, ``Your program is very
attractive, but I value my freedom more. So I reject your program.
Instead I will support a project to develop a free replacement.'' If
we value our freedom, we can act to maintain and defend it.





@essayHeading Powerful, Reliable Software Can Be Bad

@rgindex DRM, open source and
@rgindex open source, DRM and
The idea that we want software to be powerful and reliable comes from
the supposition that the software is designed to serve its users. If
it is powerful and reliable, that means it serves them better.

But software can be said to serve its users only if it respects their
freedom. What if the software is designed to put chains on its users?
Then powerfulness means the chains are more constricting, and
reliability that they are harder to remove. Malicious features, such
as spying on the users, restricting the users, back doors, and imposed
upgrades are common in proprietary software, and some open source
supporters want to implement them in open source programs.

Under pressure from the movie and record companies, software for
individuals to use is increasingly designed specifically to restrict
them. This malicious feature is known as Digital Restrictions
Management (DRM) (see
@cindex Defective by Design @emph{(see also} DRM@emph{)}
@url{http://defectivebydesign.@/org}) and is
the antithesis in spirit of the freedom that free software aims to
provide. And not just in spirit: since the goal of DRM is to trample
your freedom, DRM developers try to make it hard, impossible, or even
illegal for you to change the software that implements the DRM.

Yet some open source supporters have proposed ``open source DRM''
software. Their idea is that, by publishing the source code of
programs designed to restrict your access to encrypted media and by
allowing others to change it, they will produce more powerful and
reliable software for restricting users like you. The software would
then be delivered to you in devices that do not allow you to change
it.

This software might be open source and use the open source development
model, but it won't be free software since it won't respect the
freedom of the users that actually run it. If the open source
development model succeeds in making this software more powerful and
reliable for restricting you, that will make it even worse.
@rgindex DRM, open source and
@rgindex open source, DRM and





@essayHeading Fear of Freedom

@rgindex open source, and fear of freedom
@rgindex ``open source,'' values of
@rgindex citizen values, convenience v.@:
The main initial motivation of those who split off the open source
camp from the free software movement was that the ethical ideas of
``free software'' made some people uneasy. That's true: raising
ethical issues such as freedom, talking about responsibilities as well
as convenience, is asking people to think about things they might
prefer to ignore, such as whether their conduct is ethical. This can
trigger discomfort, and some people may simply close their minds to
it. It does not follow that we ought to stop talking about these
issues.
@rgindex free software movement @emph{(see also} GNU Project@emph{)}

That is, however, what the leaders of open source decided to do. They
figured that by keeping quiet about ethics and freedom, and talking
only about the immediate practical benefits of certain free software,
they might be able to ``sell'' the software more effectively to
certain users, especially business.

This approach has proved effective, in its own terms. The rhetoric of
open source has convinced many businesses and individuals to use, and
even develop, free software, which has extended our community---but
only at the superficial, practical level. The philosophy of open
source, with its purely practical values, impedes understanding of the
deeper ideas of free software; it brings many people into our
community, but does not teach them to defend it. That is good, as far
as it goes, but it is not enough to make freedom secure. Attracting
users to free software takes them just part of the way to becoming
defenders of their own freedom.

Sooner or later these users will be invited to switch back to
proprietary software for some practical advantage. Countless companies
seek to offer such temptation, some even offering copies gratis. Why
would users decline? Only if they have learned to value the freedom
free software gives them, to value freedom in and of itself rather
than the technical and practical convenience of specific free
software. To spread this idea, we have to talk about freedom. A
certain amount of the ``keep quiet'' approach to business can be
useful for the community, but it is dangerous if it becomes so common
that the love of freedom comes to seem like an eccentricity.

That dangerous situation is exactly what we have. Most people involved
with free software, especially its distributors, say little about
freedom---usually because they seek to be ``more acceptable to
business.'' Nearly all GNU/Linux operating system distributions add
proprietary packages to the basic free system, and they invite users
to consider this an advantage rather than a flaw.

Proprietary add-on software and partially nonfree GNU/Linux
distributions find fertile ground because most of our community does
not insist on freedom with its software. This is no coincidence. Most
GNU/Linux users were introduced to the system through ``open source''
discussion, which doesn't say that freedom is a goal. The practices
that don't uphold freedom and the words that don't talk about freedom
go hand in hand, each promoting the other. To overcome this tendency,
we need more, not less, talk about freedom.
@rgindex open source, and fear of freedom
@rgindex ``open source,'' values of
@rgindex citizen values, convenience v.@:

@page




@essayHeading Conclusion

@cindex call to action, teach others to value freedom
As the advocates of open source draw new users into our community, we
free software activists must shoulder the task of bringing the issue
of freedom to their attention. We have to say, ``It's free software
and it gives you freedom!''---more and louder than ever. Every time
you say ``free software'' rather than ``open source,'' you help our
campaign.





@essayHeading Notes

@itemize
@item
@cindex Barr, Joe
Joe Barr's article ``Live and Let License'' (ITworld.com, 22@tie{}May@tie{}2001, @url{http://www.@/itworld.@/com/@/LWD010523vcontrol4}) gives his perspective on this issue.
@item
@cindex Lakhani, Karim R.@:
Karim R.@tie{}Lakhani and
@cindex Wolf, Robert G.@:
Robert G.@tie{}Wolf's paper on the motivation of free
software developers (``Why
@cindex hackers
Hackers Do What They Do: Understanding
Motivation and Effort in Free/Open Source Software Projects,'' in
@cite{Perspectives on Free and Open Source Software,} edited by J.@tie{}Feller
and others (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2005)) says that a considerable
fraction are motivated by the view that software should be free. This
is despite the fact that they surveyed the developers on
@cindex SourceForge
SourceForge, a site that does not support the view that this is an
ethical issue.
@end itemize
@rgindex terminology, importance of using correct
@rgindex ``open source,'' values of
