Freedom or Power?
*****************

Written by Bradley M. Kuhn and Richard Stallman.

This essay was originally published on <http://gnu.org>, in 2001.

This document is part of GNU philosophy, the GNU Project's exhaustive
collection of articles and essays about free software and related
matters.

   Copyright (C) 2001, 2009 Bradley M. Kuhn and Richard Stallman

     Verbatim copying and distribution of this entire document are
     permitted worldwide, without royalty, in any medium, provided this
     notice is preserved.

--- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- ---

_The love of liberty is the love of others; the love of power is the
love of ourselves._
                                                      --William Hazlitt

In the free software movement, we stand for freedom for the users of
software.  We formulated our views by looking at what freedoms are
necessary for a good way of life, and permit useful programs to foster a
community of goodwill, cooperation, and collaboration.  Our criteria for
free software specify the freedoms that a program's users need so that
they can cooperate in a community.

   We stand for freedom for programmers as well as for other users.
Most of us are programmers, and we want freedom for ourselves as well as
for you.  But each of us uses software written by others, and we want
freedom when using that software, not just when using our own code.  We
stand for freedom for all users, whether they program often,
occasionally, or not at all.

   However, one so-called freedom that we do not advocate is the
"freedom to choose any license you want for software you write."  We
reject this because it is really a form of power, not a freedom.

   This oft overlooked distinction is crucial.  Freedom is being able to
make decisions that affect mainly you; power is being able to make
decisions that affect others more than you.  If we confuse power with
freedom, we will fail to uphold real freedom.

   Making a program proprietary is an exercise of power.  Copyright law
today grants software developers that power, so they and only they
choose the rules to impose on everyone else--a relatively small number
of people make the basic software decisions for all users, typically by
denying their freedom.  When users lack the freedoms that define free
software, they can't tell what the software is doing, can't check for
back doors, can't monitor possible viruses and worms, can't find out
what personal information is being reported (or stop the reports, even
if they do find out).  If it breaks, they can't fix it; they have to
wait for the developer to exercise its power to do so.  If it simply
isn't quite what they need, they are stuck with it.  They can't help
each other improve it.

   Proprietary software developers are often businesses.  We in the free
software movement are not opposed to business, but we have seen what
happens when a software business has the "freedom" to impose arbitrary
rules on the users of software.  Microsoft is an egregious example of
how denying users' freedoms can lead to direct harm, but it is not the
only example.  Even when there is no monopoly, proprietary software
harms society.  A choice of masters is not freedom.

   Discussions of rights and rules for software have often concentrated
on the interests of programmers alone.  Few people in the world program
regularly, and fewer still are owners of proprietary software
businesses.  But the entire developed world now needs and uses software,
so software developers now control the way it lives, does business,
communicates, and is entertained.  The ethical and political issues are
not addressed by the slogan of "freedom of choice (for developers
only)."

   If "code is law,"(1) then the real question we face is: who should
control the code you use--you, or an elite few?  We believe you are
entitled to control the software you use, and giving you that control is
the goal of free software.

   We believe you should decide what to do with the software you use;
however, that is not what today's law says.  Current copyright law
places us in the position of power over users of our code, whether we
like it or not.  The ethical response to this situation is to proclaim
freedom for each user, just as the Bill of Rights was supposed to
exercise government power by guaranteeing each citizen's freedoms.  That
is what the GNU General Public License is for: it puts you in control of
your usage of the software while protecting you from others who would
like to take control of your decisions.

   As more and more users realize that code is law, and come to feel
that they too deserve freedom, they will see the importance of the
freedoms we stand for, just as more and more users have come to
appreciate the practical value of the free software we have developed.

   ---------- Footnotes ----------

   (1) William J. Mitchell, _City of Bits: Space, Place, and the
Infobahn_ (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1995), p. 111, as quoted by
Lawrence Lessig in _Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace, Version 2.0_ (New
York, NY: Basic Books, 2006), p. 5.

