Science Must Push Copyright Aside
*********************************

This essay was first published in 'Nature' magazine's 'Web Debates'
forum, on 8 June 2001.

This document is part of GNU philosophy, the GNU Project's exhaustive
collection of articles and essays about free software and related
matters.

   Copyright (C) 2001 Richard Stallman

     Verbatim copying and distribution of this entire document are
     permitted worldwide, without royalty, in any medium, provided this
     notice is preserved.

--- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- ---

It should be a truism that the scientific literature exists to
disseminate scientific knowledge, and that scientific journals exist to
facilitate the process.  It therefore follows that rules for use of the
scientific literature should be designed to help achieve that goal.

   The rules we have now, known as copyright, were established in the
age of the printing press, an inherently centralized method of
mass-production copying.  In a print environment, copyright on journal
articles restricted only journal publishers--requiring them to obtain
permission to publish an article--and would-be plagiarists.  It helped
journals to operate and disseminate knowledge, without interfering with
the useful work of scientists or students, either as writers or readers
of articles.  These rules fit that system well.

   The modern technology for scientific publishing, however, is the
World Wide Web.  What rules would best ensure the maximum dissemination
of scientific articles, and knowledge, on the web?  Articles should be
distributed in nonproprietary formats, with open access for all.  And
everyone should have the right to "mirror" articles--that is, to
republish them verbatim with proper attribution.

   These rules should apply to past as well as future articles, when
they are distributed in electronic form.  But there is no crucial need
to change the present copyright system as it applies to paper
publication of journals because the problem is not in that domain.

   Unfortunately, it seems that not everyone agrees with the truisms
that began this article.  Many journal publishers appear to believe that
the purpose of scientific literature is to enable them to publish
journals so as to collect subscriptions from scientists and students.
Such thinking is known as "confusion of the means with the ends."

   Their approach has been to restrict access even to read the
scientific literature to those who can and will pay for it.  They use
copyright law, which is still in force despite its inappropriateness for
computer networks, as an excuse to stop scientists from choosing new
rules.

   For the sake of scientific cooperation and humanity's future, we must
reject that approach at its root--not merely the obstructive systems
that have been instituted, but the mistaken priorities that inspired
them.

   Journal publishers sometimes claim that online access requires
expensive high-powered server machines, and that they must charge access
fees to pay for these servers.  This "problem" is a consequence of its
own "solution."  Give everyone the freedom to mirror, and libraries
around the world will set up mirror sites to meet the demand.  This
decentralized solution will reduce network bandwidth needs and provide
faster access, all the while protecting the scholarly record against
accidental loss.

   Publishers also argue that paying the editors requires charging for
access.  Let us accept the assumption that editors must be paid; this
tail need not wag the dog.  The cost of editing for a typical paper is
between 1 percent and 3 percent of the cost of funding the research to
produce it.  Such a small percentage of the cost can hardly justify
obstructing the use of the results.

   Instead, the cost of editing could be recovered, for example, through
page charges to the authors, who can pass these on to the research
sponsors.  The sponsors should not mind, given that they currently pay
for publication in a more cumbersome way, through overhead fees for the
university library's subscription to the journal.  By changing the
economic model to charge editing costs to the research sponsors, we can
eliminate the apparent need to restrict access.  The occasional author
who is not affiliated with an institution or company, and who has no
research sponsor, could be exempted from page charges, with costs levied
on institution-based authors.

   Another justification for access fees to online publications is to
fund conversion of the print archives of a journal into online form.
That work needs to be done, but we should seek alternative ways of
funding it that do not involve obstructing access to the result.  The
work itself will not be any more difficult, or cost any more.  It is
self-defeating to digitize the archives and waste the results by
restricting access.

   The US Constitution says that copyright exists "to promote the
Progress of Science."  When copyright impedes the progress of science,
science must push copyright out of the way.
