@c
@c essay-header.texi -- Essays common header;
@c
@c Copyright (C) 2013, 2014 Bruno Félix Rezende Ribeiro
@c
@c Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
@c document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
@c Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
@c Foundation; with no Invariant Sections.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU Free Documentation
@c License along with this program.  If not, see
@c <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
@c

@ifclear INCLUDEessayHeader
@set INCLUDEessayHeader
@include release.texi
@defindex rg
@synindex rg cp

@ifclear GNUphiCollection
@ifclear GNUphiThird
@set GNUphiStandalone
@end ifclear
@end ifclear





@c --- Macro: essayWhole
@macro essayWhole
@inlineifset{GNUphiCollection, chapter}@inlineifset{GNUphiStandalone,
document}@inlineifset{GNUphiThird, appendix}
@end macro





@c --- Macro: philosophyDescription
@macro philosophyDescription
This document is part of GNU philosophy, the GNU Project's exhaustive
collection of articles and essays about free software and related
matters.
@end macro

@macro VerbatimNotice
Verbatim copying and distribution of this entire @essayWhole are
permitted worldwide, without royalty, in any medium, provided this
notice is preserved.
@end macro

@macro CCANDnotice
This @essayWhole is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NoDerivs@tie{}3.0 United States License. To view a copy of
this license, visit
@url{http://creativecommons.@/org/@/licenses/@/by-nd/@/3.0/us/} or
send a letter to Creative Commons, 171@tie{}Second Street,
Suite@tie{}300, San Francisco, California@tie{}94105, USA.
@end macro





@c --- Macro: essayCopyingSub

@macro essayCopyingSub
@c Notice above copyright one;
@noindent
@essayPreNotice

@ifclear GNUphiCollection
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@noindent
@philosophyDescription
@end ifclear

@c Copyright notice;
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex
@c @noindent
@essayCopyright

@c License notice;
@ifset licenseVerbatim
@quotation
@VerbatimNotice
@end quotation
@end ifset

@ifset licenseCCAND
@quotation
@CCANDnotice
@end quotation
@end ifset

@end macro




@c --- Macro: essayCopying

@c Define the copying notice as macro so it can be used in several
@c places for the specific needs of different output types.
@macro essayCopying

@c ##################################################################
@c # In a collection, put the essay copying notice in small fonts.  #
@c ##################################################################

@ifclear GNUphiStandalone
@ifnotinfo
@smallquotation
@essayCopyingSub
@end smallquotation
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex
@end ifnotinfo

@ifinfo
@essayCopyingSub
@end ifinfo
@end ifclear




@c ####################################################################
@c # In a standalone which is not a Tex or Info, put the essay copying
@c # notice in small fonts.
@c ####################################################################

@ifset GNUphiStandalone
@ifnottex
@ifnotinfo
@smallquotation
@essayCopyingSub
@end smallquotation
@end ifnotinfo
@end ifnottex

@iftex
@essayCopyingSub
@end iftex

@ifinfo
@essayCopyingSub
@end ifinfo
@end ifset


@ifinfo
@verbatim
--- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- ---
@end verbatim
@sp 1
@end ifinfo
@end macro





@c --- Macro: essayHeader
@macro essayHeader{file, node, title}

@c %**start of header
@ifset GNUphiStandalone
@setfilename \file\.info
@settitle \title\
@defindex rg
@synindex rg cp
@end ifset
@c %**end of header

@c --- Copying notice;

@c If this is a standalone essay, we don't have a copying notice
@c already defined.  So, define it.
@ifset GNUphiStandalone
@copying
@essayCopying
@end copying
@end ifset

@c --- Title page and heading/footing;

@c If this is a standalone essay, we don't have a title page and
@c heading already defined for TeX output.  So, define it.  For a
@c standalone essay the copying notice goes in the title page.
@ifset GNUphiStandalone
@titlepage
@title \title\
@subtitle @value{package}
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage
@iftex
@headings off
@everyheading @thistitle @| @| @value{package}
@everyfooting  @| @thispage @|
@end iftex
@end ifset

@c --- Info directory;

@c If this is a standalone essay, we don't have the Info directory
@c entry already defined for Info output.  So, define it.
@ifset GNUphiStandalone
@dircategory @value{package}
@direntry
* \node\: (\file\)
@end direntry
@end ifset

@c If this is a standalone essay, we don't have the
@ifset GNUphiStandalone
@node Top
@c In every output, but TeX, define the Top node as having the essay's
@c title and then put the copying notice right after it.
@ifnottex
@top \title\
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex
@c In TeX output, put the essay's title centralized.
@iftex
@centerchap \title\
@end iftex
@end ifset

@c In a collection the node and chapter is already defined as the
@c essay's title.  Then, just insert the copying notice after it.
@ifclear GNUphiStandalone
@essayCopying
@end ifclear

@unmacro essayPreNotice
@unmacro essayCopyright

@licenseVerbatim
@end macro





@c --- License macros;
@macro clearLicense
@clear licenseVerbatim
@clear licenseCCAND
@end macro

@macro licenseVerbatim
@clearLicense
@set licenseVerbatim
@end macro

@macro licenseCCAND
@clearLicense
@set licenseCCAND
@end macro

@licenseVerbatim





@c --- macro: essayCite
@macro essayCite{file, node, title}
@inlineifset{GNUphiCollection, @inlinefmtifelse{info,
@inlinefmtifelse{plaintext, @cite{\title\}, @cite{\title\}
(@pxref{\node\,it})},
@ref{\node\,,\title\}}}@inlineifset{GNUphiStandalone,
@inlinefmtifelse{info, @inlinefmtifelse{plaintext, @cite{\title\},
@cite{\title\} (@pxref{,it,,\file\})},
@ref{,,,\file\,\title\}}}@inlineifset{GNUphiThird,
@inlinefmtifelse{info, @inlinefmtifelse{plaintext, @cite{\title\},
@cite{\title\} (@pxref{,it,,\file\})}, @ref{,,,\file\,\title\}}}
@end macro





@c --- Essay heading macros;
@macro essaySuperHeading{text}
@ifnothtml
@heading \text\
@end ifnothtml
@ifhtml
@majorheading \text\
@end ifhtml
@end macro

@macro essayHeading{text}
@ifnothtml
@subheading \text\
@end ifnothtml
@ifhtml
@heading \text\
@end ifhtml
@end macro

@macro essaySubHeading{text}
@ifnothtml
@subsubheading \text\
@end ifnothtml
@ifhtml
@subheading \text\
@end ifhtml
@end macro





@end ifclear
