@c
@c release.texi -- Release-specific Texinfo variables;
@c
@c Copyright (C) 2010, 2013, 2014 Bruno Félix Rezende Ribeiro
@c <oitofelix@gnu.org>
@c
@c Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
@c document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
@c Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
@c Foundation; with no Invariant Sections.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU Free Documentation
@c License along with this program.  If not, see
@c <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
@c

@ifclear INCLUDEpackage
@set INCLUDEpackage

@c --- Basic information;
@set package GNU philosophy
@set tarName philosophy
@set version 0.1.20140214
@set GNUid philosophy
@set date February 14, 2014
@set autoconfVersion 2.69
@set automakeVersion 1.14.1
@set texinfoVersion 5.2
@set autoconfMinVersion 2.60
@set automakeMinVersion 1.13
@set texinfoMinVersion 5.0




@c --- Internet resources;

@c --- --- GNU
@set domain gnu.org
@set webPage https://www.@value{domain}/software/@value{GNUid}/
@c --- --- non-GNU
@c @set domain nongnu.org
@c @set webpage http://www.@value{domain}/@value{GNUid}/



@c --- --- Savannah;
@set atomFeed https://savannah.@value{domain}/news/atom.php?group=@value{GNUid}
@set develPage https://savannah.@value{domain}/projects/@value{GNUid}/
@set supportTrack https://savannah.@value{domain}/support/?group=@value{GNUid}
@set bugTrack https://savannah.@value{domain}/bugs/?group=@value{GNUid}



@c --- --- Mailing lists;

@c --- --- --- Bug
@c --- --- --- --- GNU
@set mailBugName bug-@value{GNUid}
@c --- --- --- --- non-GNU
@c @set mailBugName @value{GNUid}-bug
@set mailBugAddr @value{mailBugName}@@@value{domain}
@set mailBugWeb https://lists.@value{domain}/mailman/listinfo/@value{mailBugName}/
@set mailBugArch https://lists.@value{domain}/archive/html/@value{mailBugName}/

@c --- --- --- Private
@c --- --- --- --- GNU
@set mailPrivName @value{GNUid}
@c --- --- --- --- non-GNU
@c @set mailPrivName @value{GNUid}-support
@set mailPrivAddr @value{mailPrivName}@@@value{domain}
@set mailPrivWeb https://lists.@value{domain}/mailman/listinfo/@value{mailPrivName}/
@set mailPrivArch https://lists.@value{domain}/archive/html/@value{mailPrivName}/



@c --- --- IRC;
@set IRCchan @value{GNUid}
@set IRCserver irc.freenode.net
@set IRCurl irc://@value{IRCserver}/@value{IRCchan}

@c --- --- FTP;
@set tarball @value{tarName}-@value{version}.tar.gz
@set tarSign @value{tarball}.sig

@c --- --- --- GNU
@set ftp https://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/
@set ftpMirror http://ftpmirror.gnu.org/
@set ftpOld http://download.savannah.gnu.org/releases/@value{GNUid}/
@set ftpOldMirror http://download-mirror.savannah.gnu.org/releases/@value{GNUid}/
@c --- --- --- non-GNU
@c @set ftp http://download.savannah.nongnu.org/releases/
@c @set ftpMirror http://download-mirror.savannah.nongnu.org/releases/

@set ftpDir @value{ftp}@value{GNUid}/
@set ftpMirrorDir @value{ftpMirror}@value{GNUid}/
@set ftpTarball @value{ftpDir}@value{tarball}
@set ftpTarSign @value{ftpDir}@value{tarSign}
@set ftpMirrorTarball @value{ftpMirrorDir}@value{tarball}
@set ftpMirrorTarSign @value{ftpMirrorDir}@value{tarSign}

@c --- --- CVS;
@set CVSsavannah https://savannah.@value{domain}/cvs/?group=@value{GNUid}
@set CVSserver cvs.savannah.@value{domain}
@set CVSdir /sources/@value{GNUid}
@set CVSurl @value{CVSserver}:@value{CVSdir}





@c --- GPG;
@set signer Bruno Félix Rezende Ribeiro
@set keyID 0x28D618AF
@set fingerprint 7CB1 208C 7336 56B7 5962  2500 27B9 C6FD 28D6 18AF





@c --- Licenses;
@set progLicenseURL https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html
@set docLicenseURL https://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.html





@c --- Financial;
@set btcAddr 1CDyAsXCK91hGMJyJjuf28pUSPbzUyn2Vv

@end ifclear
