@c
@c ANNOUNCEMENT.texi -- Announcement of new release;
@c
@c Copyright (C) 2010, 2013, 2014 Bruno Félix Rezende Ribeiro
@c <oitofelix@gnu.org>
@c
@c Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
@c document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
@c Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
@c Foundation; with no Invariant Sections.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU Free Documentation
@c License along with this program.  If not, see
@c <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
@c

@c %**start of header
@ifclear manual
@setfilename ANNOUNCEMENT
@documentencoding UTF-8
@c @documentlanguage en_US
@firstparagraphindent insert
@footnotestyle end
@settitle ANNOUNCEMENT
@end ifclear
@include release.texi
@c %**end of header





@c --- homepage: Navigation bar;
@ifset homepage
@include navigation.texi
@end ifset





@c --- file: Copying notice;
@c @ifset file
@c @set FILE ANNOUNCEMENT
@c @include copying.texi
@c @insertcopying
@c @end ifset





@ifclear manual
@centerchap Announcement: @value{package} @value{version}
@end ifclear

The GNU project is pleased to announce @value{package} @value{version}
released @value{date}.  This is a stable release and the first
official GNU release.

A big thank you to Richard M. Stallman, the main author of this
package.





@heading News

@table @asis
@item 0.1
Initial release; GNU philosophy contains exactly the same essays found
in ``Free Software, Free Society: Selected Essays of Richard
M. Stallman, Second Edition''.
@end table





@heading Download

@noindent
Here are the compressed sources and a GPG detached signature:
@example
@value{ftpTarball}
@value{ftpTarSign}
@end example

@noindent
Use a mirror for higher download bandwidth:
@example
@value{ftpMirrorTarball}
@value{ftpMirrorTarSign}
@end example

Use a @file{.sig} file to verify that the corresponding file (without
the @file{.sig} suffix) is intact.  First, be sure to download both
the @file{.sig} file and the corresponding tarball.  Then, run a
command like this:

@example
gpg --verify @value{tarSign}
@end example

If that command fails because you don't have the required public key,
then run this command to import it:

@example
gpg --recv-keys @value{keyID} --keyserver hkp://keys.gnupg.net
@end example

@noindent
and rerun the @code{gpg --verify} command.

This release is signed by @emph{@value{signer}}.  His key fingerprint
is @code{@value{fingerprint}}.

@noindent
This release was bootstrapped with the following tools:
@itemize
@item
GNU Autoconf @value{autoconfVersion}
@item
GNU Automake @value{automakeVersion}
@item
GNU Texinfo @value{texinfoVersion}
@end itemize





@heading Description

@value{package} is the GNU Project's exhaustive collection of articles
and essays about free software and related matters.  It provides all
of them standalone or collected as a huge single book, in Info, HTML,
PDF, plain text and every other format supported by Texinfo.  It makes
the individual Texinfo source code of any essay readily available for
inclusion in another package's documentation and also implements a way
to generate the whole @url{https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/, GNU
website philosophy section} automatically from the Texinfo sources.
Last, but not least, it facilitates the future work of the
@acronym{FSF, Free Software Foundation} in the publication of free
software articles collection books like: ``Free Software, Free
Society: Selected Essays of Richard M. Stallman''.





@heading Links

@table @asis
@item Homepage
@value{webPage}
@item Atom feed
@value{atomFeed}
@item Mailing list
@value{mailBugAddr}
@item IRC channel
@value{IRCurl}
@item Support Tracker
@value{supportTrack}
@item Bug Tracker
@value{bugTrack}
@item Development page
@value{develPage}
@end table





@c --- homepage: Footer;
@ifset homepage
@include footer.texi
@end ifset
