@c
@c AUTHORS.texi -- List of major contributors;
@c
@c Copyright (C) 2010, 2013, 2014 Bruno Félix Rezende Ribeiro
@c <oitofelix@gnu.org>
@c
@c Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
@c document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
@c Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
@c Foundation; with no Invariant Sections.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU Free Documentation
@c License along with this program.  If not, see
@c <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
@c

@c %**start of header
@ifclear manual
@setfilename AUTHORS
@documentencoding UTF-8
@c @documentlanguage en_US
@firstparagraphindent insert
@footnotestyle end
@settitle AUTHORS
@end ifclear
@include release.texi
@c %**end of header





@c --- homepage: Navigation bar;
@ifset homepage
@include navigation.texi
@end ifset





@c --- file: Copying notice;
@ifset file
@set FILE AUTHORS
@include copying.texi
@insertcopying
@end ifset




@c --- AUTHORS;
@ifclear manual
@centerchap Authors
@end ifclear

This @inlineifset{manual, chapter}@inlineifset{file,
file}@inlineifset{homepage, page} contains a list of those people who
are the writers of the philosophical essays and articles found herein.
This program would not be what it is today without the invaluable help
of these people, to whom we would like to say:

@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex
@center @strong{THANK YOU VERY MUCH!}
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

The names are listed in chronological order of contribution.  Each
person's contact information, usually email, and a summary of that
person's contribution is put in per correspondent section.

For the list of maintainers of this package through the ages, see
@inlineifset{homepage, @url{MAINTAINERS.html, the thanks
page}}@inlineifset{file, file @file{MAINTAINERS}}@inlineifset{manual,
@ref{Maintainers}}.

For other external contributions, that does not matter for copyright
purposes, e.g., bug reports, patch for markup and good ideas, see
@inlineifset{homepage, @url{THANKS.html, the thanks
page}}@inlineifset{file, file @file{THANKS}}@inlineifset{manual,
@ref{Thanks}}.

If you would appreciate your own name listed here, @strong{please
contribute!}  See @inlineifset{homepage,
@url{README.html#Contributing, how to contribute}}@inlineifset{file,
the ``Contributing'' section of the @file{README}
file}@inlineifset{manual, @ref{Contributing}}.

@table @asis
@item Richard M. Stallman (rms) @email{rms@@gnu.org}
He is the author of the vast majority of essays contained in this
package.  Those are:

@itemize
@item The Free Software Definition
@item The GNU Project
@item The Initial Announcement of the GNU Operating System
@item The GNU Manifesto
@item Why Software Should Not Have Owners
@item Why Software Should Be Free
@item Why Schools Should Exclusively Use Free Software
@item Releasing Free Software If You Work at a University
@item Why Free Software Needs Free Documentation
@item Selling Free Software
@item The Free Software Song
@item What's in a Name?
@item Categories of Free and Nonfree Software
@item Why Open Source Misses the Point of Free Software
@item Did You Say ``Intellectual Property''?  It's a Seductive Mirage
@item Words to Avoid (or Use with Care) Because They Are Loaded or
Confusing
@item The Right to Read; A Dystopian Short Story
@item Misinterpreting Copyright---A Series of Errors
@item Science Must Push Copyright Aside
@item Freedom---or Copyright
@item What Is Copyleft?
@item Copyleft: Pragmatic Idealism
@item Anatomy of a Trivial Patent
@item Software Patents and Literary Patents
@item The Danger of Software Patents
@item Microsoft's New Monopoly
@item Introduction to the Licenses (coauthored by Brett Smith)
@item GNU General Public License
@item Why Upgrade to GPLv3
@item GNU Lesser General Public License
@item GNU Free Documentation License
@item Can You Trust Your Computer?
@item Who Does That Server Really Serve?
@item Free but Shackled: The Java Trap
@item The JavaScript Trap
@item The X Window System Trap
@item The Problem Is Software Controlled by Its Developer
@item We Can Put an End to Word Attachments
@item Thank You Larry McVoy
@item Computing ``Progress'': Good and Bad
@item Avoiding Ruinous Compromises
@item Overcoming Social Inertia
@item Freedom or Power? (coauthored by Bradley M. Kuhn)
@end itemize

@item Brett Smith
@itemize
@item Introduction to the Licenses (coauthored by Richard M. Stallman)
@end itemize

@item  Bradley M. Kuhn
@itemize
@item Freedom or Power? (coauthored by Richard M. Stallman)
@end itemize

@item Richard E. Buckman
@itemize
@item A Note on Software (coauthored by Joshua Gay)
@end itemize

@item Joshua Gay
@itemize
@item A Note on Software (coauthored by Richard E. Buckman)
@end itemize

@end table





@c --- homepage: Footer;
@ifset homepage
@include footer.texi
@end ifset
