@c
@c BUGS.texi -- Bugs you must be aware of;
@c
@c Copyright (C) 2010, 2013, 2014 Bruno Félix Rezende Ribeiro
@c <oitofelix@gnu.org>
@c
@c Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
@c document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
@c Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
@c Foundation; with no Invariant Sections.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU Free Documentation
@c License along with this program.  If not, see
@c <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
@c

@c %**start of header
@ifclear manual
@setfilename BUGS
@documentencoding UTF-8
@c @documentlanguage en_US
@firstparagraphindent insert
@footnotestyle end
@settitle BUGS
@end ifclear
@include release.texi
@c %**end of header





@c --- homepage: Navigation bar;
@ifset homepage
@include navigation.texi
@end ifset





@c --- file: Copying notice;
@ifset file
@set FILE BUGS
@include copying.texi
@insertcopying
@end ifset





@c --- BUGS;
@ifclear manual
@centerchap Bugs
@end ifclear

This @inlineifset{manual, chapter}@inlineifset{file,
file}@inlineifset{homepage, page} contains a list of bugs of this
package, prerequisite software or specific platforms that you must be
aware of.  If there is a known workaround we describe it here too.  If
you want to undertake the solution of any of these bugs, we appreciate
your help; please write to @email{@value{mailBugAddr}} so we can be
aware that the problem is being addressed, and talk with you how to do
it best.  @inlineifclear{homepage, It is best to consult the latest
version of this file in the package source code repository.
@inlineifset{file, See the sections ``Getting a copy'' and ``Hacking''
of the @file{README} file}@inlineifset{manual, See @ref{Getting a
copy} and @ref{Hacking}} for instruction on how to access it.}

For more practical details about getting involved, see
@inlineifset{manual, @ref{Contributing}}@inlineifset{homepage,
@url{README.html#Contributing, how to contribute}}@inlineifset{file,
the section ``Contributing'' in the @file{README} file}.

As well as the issues listed here, there are bug reports --- that you
might want to be aware of --- at the @url{@value{bugTrack}, bug
tracker web interface}.  See @inlineifset{homepage,
@url{README.html#Bug-reporting, how to report a
bug}}@inlineifset{file, the section ``Bug reporting'' in @file{README}
file}@inlineifset{manual, @ref{Bug reporting}} for more information.


@table @emph
@item PO4A can't recognize Texinfo 5.2 quotation-like environments
In PO4A 0.45 the quotation-like Texinfo environments
@code{smallquotation}, @code{indentedblock}, @code{smallindentedblock}
and @code{raggedright}, present in Texinfo 5.2, are not registered in
its Texinfo module, causing @command{po4a-gettextize} to yield errors
like:

@example
master.texi:71: (po4a::tex) unmatched end of environment
@end example

when such environments are found in master documents.  The fix is
already applied in their @abbr{VCS, Version Control System}
repository.  You can obtain the required development version running:

@example
svn checkout svn://scm.alioth.debian.org/svn/po4a/trunk
@end example

For the specific patch, check:
@url{https://lists.alioth.debian.org/pipermail/po4a-devel/2014-January/002240.html,
[Po4a-devel] [PATCH] Register missing Texinfo 5.2 quotation-like
environments}.


@item ImageMagick program @command{convert} treatment of BDF and TTF fonts
There is a bug in ImageMagick program @command{convert}, which is used
to perform the rendering of several language scripts, that prevents
@abbr{BDF, Glyph Bitmap Distribution Format} and @abbr{PCF, Portable
Compiled Format} formats of GNU Unifont from working properly.  If you
see messages like @samp{convert: geometry does not contain image}
probably you are experiencing that bug.  The @abbr{TTF, TrueType}
format of GNU Unifont is known to work properly.  Therefore, to fix
such a bug download the TTF build of GNU Unifont from
@url{http://unifoundry.com/pub/unifont-6.3.20131020/font-builds/unifont-6.3.20131020.ttf.gz}
and ask the GNU philosophy build system to use it by means of the
@command{configure} option @option{--with-font}.
@end table





@c --- homepage: Footer;
@ifset homepage
@include footer.texi
@end ifset
