@c
@c MAINTAINERS.texi -- List of maintainers through ages;
@c
@c Copyright (C) 2010, 2013, 2014 Bruno Félix Rezende Ribeiro
@c <oitofelix@gnu.org>
@c
@c Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
@c document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
@c Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
@c Foundation; with no Invariant Sections.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU Free Documentation
@c License along with this program.  If not, see
@c <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
@c

@c %**start of header
@ifclear manual
@setfilename MAINTAINERS
@documentencoding UTF-8
@c @documentlanguage en_US
@firstparagraphindent insert
@footnotestyle end
@settitle MAINTAINERS
@end ifclear
@include release.texi
@c %**end of header





@c --- homepage: Navigation bar;
@ifset homepage
@include navigation.texi
@end ifset





@c --- file: Copying notice;
@ifset file
@set FILE MAINTAINERS
@include copying.texi
@insertcopying
@end ifset




@c --- MAINTAINERS;
@ifclear manual
@centerchap Maintainers
@end ifclear

This @inlineifset{manual, chapter}@inlineifset{file,
file}@inlineifset{homepage, page} contains a list of those people who
are the maintainers of this package thorough out the ages.  This
program would not be what it is today without the invaluable help of
these people, to whom we would like to say:

@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex
@center @strong{THANK YOU VERY MUCH!}
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

The names are listed in chronological order of contribution.  Each
person's contact information, usually email, and a summary of that
person's contribution is put in per correspondent section.

For the writers of the articles and essays contained in this package,
see @inlineifset{homepage, @url{AUTHORS.html, the authors
page}}@inlineifset{file, @file{AUTHORS} file}@inlineifset{manual,
@ref{Authors}}.

For other external contributions, that does not matter for copyright
purposes, e.g., bug reports, patch for markup and good ideas, see
@inlineifset{homepage, @url{THANKS.html, the thanks
page}}@inlineifset{file, file @file{THANKS}}@inlineifset{manual,
@ref{Thanks}}.

If you would appreciate your own name listed here, @strong{please
contribute!}  See @inlineifset{homepage,
@url{README.html#Contributing, how to contribute}}@inlineifset{file,
the ``Contributing'' section of the @file{README}
file}@inlineifset{manual, @ref{Contributing}}.

@table @asis
@item Bruno Félix Rezende Ribeiro (oitofelix) @email{oitofelix@@gnu.org}
He is the conceiver and original maintainer of this package.
@end table





@c --- homepage: Footer;
@ifset homepage
@include footer.texi
@end ifset
