@c
@c README.texi -- Description, prerequisites, configuration, build,
@c                installation, use, distribution, obtainment, contact,
@c                bug reports, contribution, donation and hacking;
@c
@c Copyright (C) 2013, 2014 Bruno Félix Rezende Ribeiro
@c <oitofelix@gnu.org>
@c
@c Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
@c document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
@c Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
@c Foundation; with no Invariant Sections.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU Free Documentation
@c License along with this program.  If not, see
@c <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
@c

@c %**start of header
@ifclear manual
@setfilename README
@documentencoding UTF-8
@c @documentlanguage en_US
@firstparagraphindent insert
@footnotestyle end
@settitle README
@end ifclear
@include release.texi
@c %**end of header





@c --- Macros;

@c --- --- metaSection
@macro metaSection{name}
@ifset file
@node \name\
@chapter \name\
@end ifset
@ifset manual
@node \name\
@section \name\
@end ifset
@ifset homepage
@anchor{\name\}
@majorheading \name\
@end ifset
@end macro





@c --- homepage: Navigation bar;
@ifset homepage
@include navigation.texi

@majorheading Main

@multitable @columnfractions .1 .1 .1 .1 .1 .1
@headitem @ref{Download}
@tab @ref{Contact}
@tab @ref{Bug reporting}
@tab @ref{Contributing}
@tab @ref{Donating}
@tab @ref{Hacking}
@end multitable
@end ifset





@c --- file: Copying notice;
@ifset file
@set FILE README
@include copying.texi
@insertcopying
@end ifset





@c --- file: Table of contents;
@ifset file
@sp 1
@noindent
--- Table of Contents ---
@contents
@sp 2
@end ifset





@c --- file: Preface;
@ifclear homepage
@ifset file
@unnumbered Preface
@end ifset

This @inlineifset{manual, chapter}@inlineifset{file, file} briefly
explains for what this package is intended, gives relevant
considerations regarding dependencies, configuration, build,
installation and use, describes which are the rules for its
distribution, how to get a copy of it, how to contact the community,
how to fill bug reports, how to contribute to the package, how to make
donations to support its development and how to get started hacking
the code.  Bear in mind that instructions in this @inlineifset{manual,
chapter}@inlineifset{file, file} are package-specific; for general and
in-depth configuration, build and installation instructions refer to
the file @file{INSTALL} present in the top-level directory of the
source distribution.  If you have checked out the source tree from the
CVS repository see @ref{Hacking}.

@ifset file
For other information about this package you can check the following
files found in the top level directory of the distribution:

@table @file
@item NEWS
User-visible changes since previous versions;
@item TODO
Features we want to see implemented someday;
@item BUGS
Bugs you must be aware of;
@item AUTHORS
List of major contributors;
@item MAINTAINERS
List of maintainers;
@item THANKS
List of minor contributors;
@item DONORS
People who supported the development by donations;
@item INSTALL
Generic build and installation instructions;
@item COPYING
Notice about articles and essays licenses;
@item COPYING.DOC
The documentation license;
@item ChangeLog
Detailed list of changes of the source code;
@end table
@end ifset

@menu
* Description::      What this package is all about;
* Prerequisites::    Package build prerequisites;
* Configuration::    Influential configuration settings;
* Make interface::   General concepts about the GNU make interface;
* Goal suffixes::    Further specifying the action of goal;
* Build::            Build instructions;
* Installation::     Install goals and locations;
* Cleaning::         Deleting non-source objects from build directory;
* Making a tarball:: Generating a pristine tarball for redistribution;
* Usage::            Using the essays in other package's documentation;
* Distribution::     The user's right to modify and redistribute;
* Getting a copy::   GNU FTP server and CVS;
* Contact::          Mailing list and IRC;
* Bug reporting::    Support and bug trackers;
* Contributing::     Several ways to help program's development;
* Donating::         Supporting developer's work;
* Hacking::          Get started with CVS checkout;
@end menu

For more information about this package you can visit its home page at
@url{@value{webPage}}.  If you want to receive notifications about new
releases of this package or important issues related to it, subscribe
to the mailing list, as described in @ref{Contact}, or subscribe to
the package atom feed @url{@value{atomFeed}}.

@end ifclear





@c --- Description;
@metaSection Description

@value{package} is the GNU Project's exhaustive collection of articles
and essays about free software and related matters.  It provides all
of them @emph{standalone} or @emph{collected} as a huge single book,
in @emph{Info}, @emph{HTML}, @emph{PDF}, @emph{plain text}, and every
other format supported by Texinfo, in several different languages.  It
makes the individual Texinfo source code of any essay readily
available for inclusion in another package's documentation and also
implements a way to generate the whole
@url{https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/, GNU website philosophy section}
automatically from the Texinfo sources.  Last, but not least, it
facilitates the future work of the @acronym{FSF, Free Software
Foundation} in the publication of free software articles collection
books, like: ``Free Software, Free Society: Selected Essays of Richard
M. Stallman''.

Some highlighted benefits are:
@itemize
@item
It is more easy to spread GNU philosophy.  The availability of several
formats means that it is simpler for people to find the desired
article in a file format that fits their constraints and suits the
access, redistribution and presentation requirements.
@item
Besides its free software components, the GNU system ought to document
its own philosophy.  It is very natural for users to expect that the
philosophy and history that inspired the GNU system existence be
easily accessible within its documentation system.
@item
It makes life easier for authors who want to use their package
documentation to spread the GNU philosophy.  Before it there was no
easy way to get GNU philosophical articles in an adequate format to
include in arbitrary documentation; many articles only existed in HTML
specifically tailored for GNU website, others only in plain text
format hidden deeply inside package distributions, and a bunch in
non-portable Texinfo extensively written for exclusive TeX processing.
@item
All essays and articles are written in the GNU Project's standard,
official and hub format: Texinfo.  Making the GNU philosophical
documents comply with GNU standards assists in uniformity and
coherence.  For instance, until this package conception it was
remarkable the almost complete lack of essays in Info, the GNU
Project's official online documentation format.
@item
There is a single place of maintenance for GNU Project's philosophical
articles and essays.  The upkeep of all GNU Project's philosophy
documents is optimized since no error must be corrected twice and
every addition is atomically, and instantaneously, available in every
supported format, for every intended purpose.
@end itemize

The maintainers set a clear commitment to not blindly take for granted
the quality of automatic generated output, and therefore they adapt
the Texinfo source code for the particularities of each available
output format, in order to make it look better, but without the
unmindful and excessive use of back-end specific code.





@c --- file, manual: Prerequisites;
@ifclear homepage
@metaSection Prerequisites

There are two classes of software prerequisites (or dependencies, if
you will) to build the GNU philosophy package: required and optional.
If you are missing a @dfn{required prerequisite} the configuration
step will fail with an error message stating what package is needed,
which is its minimal acceptable version, and will point you to where
you can obtain it.  On the other side, the @dfn{optional
prerequisites} are needed to perform a task not considered critical
for the overall build process of the package, thus, although the
successful build can be accomplished, the resultant build may not have
all possible features enabled or only is possible to realize partial,
yet auto-sufficient, builds.  Often, in order to reduce the set of
programs the user need to have installed to complete a build, the
maintainers distribute a set of files that are not source files, but
the result of a pre-build procedure.  In that case, as long as you
don't modify the original source files, you don't need to worry about
the software used to compile the source files, as the target object
files are up-to-date.


@subheading Required

@table @asis

@item GNU Make
Instead of designing this package's build system make-files portable,
the maintainers have chosen to use a portable make program, namely GNU
Make.

Version 3.81 or superior is known to work correctly.  Earlier versions
may work, though.  You can obtain it from
@url{https://gnu.org/software/make}.

@item GNU Texinfo
It is highly critical for the build procedure as the entire source
tree of articles and essays is written in Texinfo language.  However,
the Info collections, in every available translation language, is
built by the maintainers, so you can install and use it without
building anything.

Version 5.0 or superior is required.  You can obtain it from
@url{https://gnu.org/software/texinfo}.

@end table


@subheading Optional

@table @asis

@item PO4A (PO for anything)
It is required by any localization operation, notably by localized
builds.  Without it you'll only be able to build from the original
sources (in English language).

You can obtain it from @url{http://po4a.alioth.debian.org/}.
Currently a patch needed to process correctly @value{package} Texinfo
source code is not present in the latest released version, but it's
already applied in PO4A @abbr{VCS, Version Control System} repository.
See @inlineifset{manual, @ref{Bugs}}@inlineifset{homepage,
@url{BUGS.html, bugs you must be aware of}}@inlineifset{file, the file
@file{BUGS}}.


@item GNU Unifont
It is needed for the rendering of the numerous scripts, in several
different languages, contained in the essay @cite{Translations of the
Term ``Free Software''}.  Nevertheless, the scripts are distributed
pre-rendered for essays in every format, except DVI and PS.

You can obtain it from @url{https://gnu.org/software/unifont/}.  Make
sure you get the TTF build of it, otherwise the scripts probably won't
be rendered properly as the result of a bug in ImageMagick program
@command{convert}.  See @inlineifset{manual,
@ref{Bugs}}@inlineifset{homepage, @url{BUGS.html, bugs you must be
aware of}}@inlineifset{file, the file @file{BUGS}}.


@item ImageMagick
It is used to render the scripts with GNU Unifont and also to convert
some source figures to the appropriate format for inclusion in the
essays.  As with GNU Unifont, all needed figures are distributed with
this package, but those needed by DVI and PS essays.

You can obtain it from @url{http://www.imagemagick.org/}.  It is not
clear which is the minimal acceptable version.  Please, submit a bug
report if a specific old version of ImageMagick doesn't work properly.
See @ref{Bug reporting}.
@end table

@end ifclear





@c --- file, manual: Configuration;
@ifclear homepage
@metaSection Configuration

The first step in the build process is the configuration.  It is
performed by a script called @command{configure}, present at the top
level of the source tree.  That script will guess various
system-dependent features and characteristics and then setup the build
system to properly operate underneath the system @command{configure}
ran.  The files yielded by the build process will be placed into a
directory hierarchy created by @command{configure}, immediately below
the directory in which it runs.  Thus, in order to not pollute the
source tree, as well as assure its integrity, we recommend you invoke
the script @command{configure} from a directory other than the
source's.  In this documentation, we denote the source directory
absolute name, alternatively its name relative to the build directory,
by @var{srcdir}.

It is possible to manually tune some properties of the build system by
means of command line switches and environment variables, which are
discussed in the following paragraphs.

There are some articles, remarkably @cite{Translations of the Term
``Free Software''}, that contains an invariant set of expressions in
several different language scripts.  To maximize compatibility and
coherence among all output formats the expressions are written in
plain text UTF-8 encoded files which are included in plain text format
for both aggregate types (collection and standalone), but are rendered
as @abbr{PNG, Portable Network Graphics} or @abbr{EPS, Encapsulated
PostScript}, as required by the specific back-end, in order to be
included or referenced by formats that allow graphical representation.
To achieve successfully the rendering of all scripts, it is necessary
an Unicode font that comprises all required glyph.  By default
@command{configure} script searches the system for GNU Unifont, the
standard font GNU philosophy build system uses to do such rendering
task.  To override the default and select another font of your choice
you can use the @command{configure} option
@option{--with-font=@var{font-name}} where @var{font-name} is one of
the names given in the list of available font names obtained by

@example
@var{srcdir}/configure --with-font=list
@end example

You can also explicitly specify a font file-name as in:

@example
@var{srcdir}/configure \
--with-font=/home/gnu/share/fonts/unifont-6.3.20131020.ttf
@end example

Notice that there is a bug in ImageMagick program @command{convert}
that prevents certain font formats from working properly.  See
@inlineifset{manual, @ref{Bugs}}@inlineifset{homepage, @url{BUGS.html,
bugs you must be aware of}}@inlineifset{file, the file @file{BUGS}}.

You can override the guesses of @command{configure} script about the
GNU Texinfo command @command{makeinfo} and the ImageMagick command
@command{convert} by setting the environment variables @env{MAKEINFO}
and @env{CONVERT}, respectively.  The guesses about the PO4A utilities
@command{po4a} and @command{po4a-gettextize} are overridden by the
environment variables @env{PO4A} and @env{PO4A_GETTEXTIZE},
respectively.

@end ifclear





@c --- file, manual: Make interface;
@ifclear homepage
@metaSection Make interface

@include make-help.texi

@end ifclear





@c --- file, manual: Goal suffixes;
@ifclear homepage
@metaSection Goal suffixes

@include make-help-suffixes.texi

@end ifclear





@c --- file, manual: Build;
@ifclear homepage
@metaSection Build

@include make-help-build.texi

@end ifclear





@c --- file, manual: Installation;
@ifclear homepage
@metaSection Installation

@include make-help-install.texi

@end ifclear





@c --- file, manual: Cleaning;
@ifclear homepage
@metaSection Cleaning

@include make-help-clean.texi

@end ifclear





@c --- file, manual: Making a tarball;
@ifclear homepage
@metaSection Making a tarball

@include make-help-dist.texi

@end ifclear





@c --- file, manual: Usage;
@ifclear homepage
@metaSection Usage

All GNU philosophy essays are promptly available for inclusion in
another package's documentation.  To exemplify how to do it, consider
the following hypothetical situation: your target documentation main
file is @file{gnu-3.0/doc/manual.texi} and you want to include the
original, English version, of @cite{The GNU Project} essay.  Supposing
GNU philosophy source tree is under @file{philosophy} directory, you
can find the correspondent essay file in @file{philosophy/src/essays}
directory named as @file{the-gnu-project.texi}.  As a general rule,
for an essay, whose title in lowercase, with all non-alphanumeric and
non-blank characters removed, all blank characters collapsed to a
single one, and then transliterated to @samp{-}, is @var{essay-title},
one can find the correspondent Texinfo source as
@file{philosophy/src/essays/@var{essay-title}}.

After locating the desired essay file, the next step is to copy it
from the GNU philosophy source tree to the desired target main
documentation file directory, in this illustration case the following
command suffices:

@example
cp @file{philosophy/src/essays/the-gnu-project.texi} @file{gnu-3.0/doc}
@end example

There is another required file, which is included by every essay file,
namely @file{essay-header.texi}.  That file contains all aggregate
type specific settings, the definition of several Texinfo helper
macros, huge conditional processing, among other things, whose aim is
to make essay's Texinfo source perfectly portable between the various
use cases, therefore not requiring the modification of a single line
of code in the essay file properly.  You must copy it also:

@example
cp @file{philosophy/src/essay-header.texi} @file{gnu-3.0/doc}
@end example

Now you are just a couple of changes in your documentation main file
from achieving the desired goal.  For that end, edit the file
@file{gnu-3.0/doc/manual.texi} and put somewhere inside its header the
Texinfo command:

@verbatim
@set GNUphiThird
@end verbatim

That will inform @file{essay-header.texi} about our specific use case,
and thence make the @file{the-gnu-project.texi} essay file to behave
properly when included.  Now, wherever you want an entry for the essay
in the documentation main file, you can put an include for the essay
file, like:

@verbatim
@node The GNU Project
@appendix The GNU Project
@include the-gnu-project.texi
@end verbatim

If the documentation is supposed to generate also Info files, do not
forget to put a menu entry for it:

@verbatim
@menu
[...]
GNU philosophy:
* The GNU Project::
[...]
@end menu
@end verbatim

You are done.  Simple isn't it?

@end ifclear





@c --- file, manual: Distribution;
@ifclear homepage
@metaSection Distribution

This package may be @dfn{freely redistributed}; this means that
everyone is free to use it and free to redistribute it under certain
conditions.  This package is not in the public domain; it is
copyrighted and there are restrictions on its distribution, but these
restrictions are designed to permit everything that a good cooperating
citizen would want to do.  What is not allowed is to try to prevent
others from further sharing any version of this package that they
might get from you.

Each essay and article is licensed either under verbatim copying
license or Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivs 3.0 United States
license; which one is described in the beginning of each of them.
Therefore, while you are allowed to modify the markup and freely
redistribute this package, granted you preserve the copyright and
license notices, modified versions of the subject matter text may not
be made.

For verbatim copying the precise conditions are:

@quotation
Verbatim copying and distribution are permitted worldwide, without
royalty, in any medium, provided this notice is preserved.
@end quotation

For Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivs 3.0 United States the
precise conditions can be found at
@url{http://creativecommons.@/org/@/licenses/@/by-nd/@/3.0/us/}.
@end ifclear





@c --- file, manual: Getting a copy;
@ifclear homepage
@metaSection Getting a copy

One way to get a copy of this package is from someone else who has it.
You need not ask for our permission to do so, or tell any one else;
just copy it.  You may also receive this package when you buy a
computer.  Computer manufacturers are free to distribute copies on the
same terms that apply to everyone else.

If you have access to the Internet, you can get the latest
distribution version of this package at @url{@value{ftpDir}}.  Please,
use a mirror if possible; you will be automatically redirected to the
nearest mirror at @url{@value{ftpMirrorDir}}.

A CVS repository, where the development takes place, is also
available.  It maintains the full history of modifications of every
single source file.  You can checkout any given revision of any file
or get a snapshot of the entire source tree in a particular desired
state.  Special build tools, as described in @ref{Hacking}, are
required to build from those checkouts, though.  Notably, to stay up
to date with the latest developments in the source tree, you can
anonymously checkout the repository with the following command:
@example
cvs -z9 -d:pserver:anonymous@@@value{CVSurl} \
  co @value{GNUid}
@end example
@end ifclear





@c --- homepage: Download;
@ifset homepage
@anchor{Download}
@majorheading Download

@strong{The current stable release is @value{version}} (released
@value{date}).

@noindent
Here are the compressed sources and a GPG detached signature:
@example
@value{ftpTarball}
@value{ftpTarSign}
@end example

@noindent
Use a mirror for higher download bandwidth:
@example
@value{ftpMirrorTarball}
@value{ftpMirrorTarSign}
@end example

You can find that and earlier releases at a nearby
@url{@value{ftpMirrorDir}, GNU@tie{}ftp@tie{}mirror}; or if automatic
redirection does not work use the @url{@value{ftpDir},
GNU@tie{}main@tie{}ftp@tie{}server}.

The oldest (non-GNU) releases are available from
@url{@value{ftpOldMirror}, Savannah mirror download area}
(alternatively @url{@value{ftpOld}, Savannah download area}).  They
are only of historical interest and are no longer supported.

Use a @file{.sig} file to verify that the corresponding file (without
the @file{.sig} suffix) is intact.  First, be sure to download both
the @file{.sig} file and the corresponding tarball.  Then, run a
command like this:

@example
gpg --verify @value{tarSign}
@end example

If that command fails because you don't have the required public key,
then run this command to import it:

@example
gpg --recv-keys @value{keyID} --keyserver hkp://keys.gnupg.net
@end example

@noindent
and rerun the @samp{gpg --verify} command.

This release is signed by @emph{@value{signer}}.  His key fingerprint
is @samp{@value{fingerprint}}.

Check the key's authenticity with the command
@example
gpg --fingerprint @value{keyID} | sed -n '/^[[:blank:]]\+Key/s/^.*= //p'
@end example

It must print the following fingerprint:
@example
@value{fingerprint}
@end example

Otherwise something is wrong!  In that case don't use the downloaded
tarball and contact the developers as described in @ref{Contact}.

A CVS repository, where the development takes place, is also
available.  To stay up to date with the latest developments in the
source tree, you can anonymously checkout the repository with the
following command:
@example
cvs -z9 -d:pserver:anonymous@@@value{CVSurl} co @value{GNUid}
@end example
@end ifset





@c --- Contact
@metaSection Contact

You can get in touch with other users and the maintainers of this
package subscribing to the mailing list.  Anyone is welcome to join
the list; to do so, visit the @url{@value{mailBugWeb},
@value{mailBugName} web interface}.  You can use this list for all
discussion, including asking for help and bug reporting, although the
preferred method for reporting bugs is the dedicated bug tracking web
interface described in @ref{Bug reporting}.  To post a message to all
the list members, send email to @email{@value{mailBugAddr}}.  To see
the collection of prior postings to the list, visit the
@url{@value{mailBugArch}, @value{mailBugName} archive}.

If you feel somewhat chatty, eager for a somewhat more instantaneous
response from community, you can join us on our friendly IRC channel:
@samp{@value{IRCurl}}.





@c --- Bug reporting
@metaSection Bug reporting

If you come across some problem and need help you can contact the
community as described in @ref{Contact}.  If you think you found a
bug, but is not quite sure about it, you can instead ask for support
on our @url{@value{supportTrack}, support tracker}.  We will revise
your post, advise you and take the appropriate measures.  If you are
confident you have found a bug, you can submit a bug report directly
at our @url{@value{bugTrack}, bug tracker}.  Please, when reporting a
bug include enough information for the maintainers to reproduce the
problem.





@c --- Contributing
@metaSection Contributing

This package is a collaborative effort and we encourage contributions
from anyone and everyone --- your help is very much appreciated.  You
can help in many ways:

@itemize
@item
Donate to developers in order to support their work.  See
@ref{Donating}.
@item
Help users in the mailing list and IRC channel.
@item
Find and report bugs, even better, fix the bugs you and others find.
@xref{Bug reporting}.
@item
Translate the essays into other languages.
@item
Suggest, even better, create a Texinfo source for, new essays and
articles, that are of free redistribution, in order include them in
this package.
@end itemize

You can join the maintainers team to contribute to addition and
maintenance of articles and essays at the @url{@value{develPage},
development page}.  To get started hacking see @inlinefmtifelse{html,
@url{README.html#Hacking, how to hack}, @ref{Hacking}}.





@c --- Donating;
@metaSection Donating

If you find this package useful, please @strong{send a donation} to
its maintainers to support their work.  If you use this package at
your workplace, please suggest that the company make a donation.  We
appreciate contributions of any size -- donations enable us to spend
more time working on this package, and help cover our infrastructure
expenses.

If you'd like to make a donation of any value, please send it to the
following Bitcoin address:

@example
@value{btcAddr}
@end example

Since we aren't a tax-exempt organization, we can't offer you a tax
deduction, but for all donations over 0.05@tie{}BTC, we'd be happy to
recognize your contribution in the @url{@value{webPage}DONORS.html,
donors@tie{}page}, the file @file{DONORS} in the top-level directory
of the source tree and in GNU philosophy collection book's chapter
``Donors'', for the next release.  In this case, after making the
donation, send an email to @value{mailPrivAddr} giving your name and
the amount donated, so we can keep track of people's names and
respective donation values.

We are also happy to consider making particular improvements or
changes, or giving specific technical assistance, in return for a
substantial donation over 0.5@tie{}BTC.  If you would like to discuss
this possibility, write to us at @email{@value{mailPrivAddr}}.

Another possibility is to pay a software maintenance fee.  Again,
write to us about this at @email{@value{mailPrivAddr}} to discuss how
much you want to pay and how much maintenance we can offer in return.

@center @strong{Thanks for your support!}
@sp 1





@c --- Hacking;
@metaSection Hacking

@noindent
The development sources are available through CVS at Savannah:

@display
@value{CVSsavannah}
@end display

If you are getting the sources from CVS (or change
@file{configure.ac}), you'll need to have GNU Autoconf, GNU Automake
and GNU Texinfo installed to (re)build.  All of these programs are
available from @url{@value{ftp}}.  Their required minimal versions
are:

@itemize
@item GNU Autoconf @value{autoconfMinVersion}
@item GNU Automake @value{automakeMinVersion}
@item GNU Texinfo @value{texinfoMinVersion}
@end itemize

@noindent
This release was bootstrapped with the following versions:
@itemize
@item
GNU Autoconf @value{autoconfVersion}
@item
GNU Automake @value{automakeVersion}
@item
GNU Texinfo @value{texinfoVersion}
@end itemize

After getting the CVS sources, and installing the tools above, you can
run, in the top-level directory of the source tree, @samp{./bootstrap}
and then @samp{@var{srcdir}/configure} to do a fresh build.  After
that first time, running @command{make} should suffice.  See file
@file{INSTALL}.





@c --- homepage: Footer;
@ifset homepage
@include footer.texi
@end ifset
